Eurovision Song Contest 1999




Location

The 1999 contest took place in Jerusalem, Israel, following the country's victory at the 1998 edition with the song "Diva", performed by Dana International. It was the second time that the contest was staged in Israel, following the 1979 contest also held in Jerusalem. The selected venue was the Ussishkin Auditorium of the International Convention Centre, commonly known in Hebrew as Binyenei HaUma (Hebrew: בנייני האומה), which also served as the host venue for the 1979 contest.

The prospect of the contest being staged in Israel resulted in protest by members of the Orthodox Jewish community in the country, including opposition by the deputy mayor of Jerusalem Haim Miller to the contest being staged in the city. Additional concerns over funding for the event also contributed to speculation that the contest could be moved to Malta or the United Kingdom, the countries which had finished in the top three alongside Israel the previous year. Financial guarantees by the Israeli government however helped to ensure that the contest would take place in Israel. The possibility of holding the event in an open air venue was discussed, however concerns over security led to the choice of an indoor venue for the event. A tight security presence was felt during the rehearsal week as a precaution against potential disruption from Palestinian militant groups.


Participants

Per the rules of the contest, twenty-three countries were allowed to participate in the event, a reduction from the twenty-five which took part in the 1997 and 1998 contests. Lithuania made its first appearance since 1994, and Austria, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Denmark, and Iceland returned after being relegated from the previous year's event. Russia was unable to return from relegation due to failing to broadcast the 1998 contest, as specified in the rules for that edition. 1998 participants Finland, Greece, Hungary, Macedonia, Romania, Slovakia, and Switzerland were absent from this edition.

Several of the performers taking part in the contest had previously competed as lead artists in past editions. Two artists returned as lead artists in this year's event: Doris Dragović representing Croatia had represented Yugoslavia in 1986; and Darja Švajger representing Slovenia had represented her country in 1995. A number of former competitors also returned to perform as backing vocalists for some of the competing entries: Stefán Hilmarsson , who represented Iceland in 1988 and in 1991, provided backing vocals for Selma; Kenny Lübcke , who represented Denmark in 1992, returned to provide backing for Trine Jepsen and Michael Teschl; Christopher Scicluna and Moira Stafrace, who represented Malta in 1994, provided backing for Times Three; Gabriel Forss , who represented Sweden in 1997 as a member of the group Blond, was among Charlotte Nilsson's backing vocalists; and Linda Williams, who represented the Netherlands in 1981, returned as a backing vocalist for Vanessa Chinitor. Additionally, Evelin Samuel represented Estonia in this year's contest, having previously served as backing vocalist for the country in 1997.


Qualification

Due to the high number of countries wishing to enter the contest, a relegation system was introduced in 1993 in order to reduce the number of countries which could compete in each year's contest. Any relegated countries would be able to return the following year, thus allowing all countries the opportunity to compete in at least one in every two editions. The relegation rules introduced for the 1997 contest were again utilised ahead of the 1999 contest, based on each country's average points total in previous contests. The twenty-three participants were made up of the previous year's winning country and host nation, the seventeen countries other than the host which had obtained the highest average points total over the preceding five contests, and any eligible countries which had not competed in the 1998 contest. In cases where the average was identical between two or more countries, the total number of points scored in the most recent contest determined the final order.

A new addition to the relegation rules specified that for the 2000 contest and future editions, the four countries whose broadcasters were the largest financial contributors to the contest – France, Germany, Spain, and the United Kingdom – would automatically qualify for each year's event and be exempt from relegation. This new "Big Four" group of countries was created to ensure the financial viability of the event, and was prompted by a number of poor placements in previous years for some of these countries, which if repeated in 1999 could have resulted in those countries being eliminated.

Finland, Greece, Hungary, Macedonia, Portugal, Romania, Slovakia, and Switzerland were therefore excluded from participating in the 1999 contest, to make way for the return of Austria, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Denmark, Iceland, and Lithuania, and new debuting country Latvia. However Latvia's Latvijas Televīzija subsequently withdrew its participation at a late stage, and its place in the contest was subsequently offered to Hungary as the excluded country with the highest average points total. Hungarian broadcaster Magyar Televízió declined and the offer was then passed to Portugal's Radiotelevisão Portuguesa as the next in line, which accepted.

The calculations used to determine the countries relegated for the 1999 contest are outlined in the table below.

Table key


Production

The Eurovision Song Contest 1999 was produced by the Israel Broadcasting Authority (IBA). Amnon Barkai served as executive producer, Aharon Goldfinger-Eldar served as producer, Hagai Mautner served as director, and Maya Hanoch , Mia Raveh and Ronen Levin served as designers. On behalf of the European Broadcasting Union (EBU), the event was overseen by Christine Marchal-Ortiz as scrutineer. Usually able to hold a maximum of 3,000 people, modifications made to the Ussishkin Auditorium reduced the capacity to around 2,000 for the contest, with rows of seats removed from the floor to make room for the stage and from the balcony to allow for the construction of boxes for use by various commentators.

Rehearsals in the venue for the competing acts began on 24 May 1999. Each country had two technical rehearsals in the week approaching the contest: the first rehearsals took place on 24 and 25 May, with each country allowed 40 minutes total on stage followed by a 20 minute press conference; the second rehearsals subsequently took place on 26 and 27 May, with each country allocated 30 minutes on stage. Each country took to the stage in the order in which they would perform, however the Lithuanian delegation was permitted to arrive in Israel one day later than the other delegations due to budget concerns. Subsequently the first day's rehearsals began with Belgium as the second country to perform in the contest, with the Lithuania delegation being the last to complete its first rehearsal on the second day; the order of rehearsals was corrected for the second rehearsals, with Lithuania scheduled as the first delegation on stage. Additional rehearsals took place on 26 May for the contest's concluding performance with all artists, and on 27 May for the contest's presenters and to test the voting scoreboard's computer graphics. Two dress rehearsals held on 28 May were held with an audience, the second of which was also recorded as a production stand-by in case of problems during the live contest. A further dress rehearsal took place on the afternoon of 29 May ahead of the live contest, followed by security and technical checks.

The singer Dafna Dekel, the radio and television presenter Yigal Ravid and the model and television presenter Sigal Shachmon were the presenters of the 1999 contest, the first edition to feature three presenters in a single show. Dekel had previously represented Israel in 1992 and placed sixth with the song "Ze Rak Sport". The writers of the winning song were awarded with a trophy designed by Yaacov Agam, which was presented by the previous year's winning artist Dana International.

A compilation album featuring many of the competing entries was released in Israel following the contest, commissioned by IBA and released through the Israeli record label IMP Records. The release contained nineteen of the twenty-three competing acts on CD and an additional video CD with clips from the televised broadcast and footage from backstage.


Format


Entries

Each participating broadcaster was represented in the contest by one song, no longer than three minutes in duration. A maximum of six performers were allowed on stage during each country's performance, and all performers were required to be at least 16 years old in the year of the contest. Selected entries were not permitted to be released commercially before 1 January 1999, and were then only allowed to be released in the country they represented until after the contest was held. Entries were required to be selected by each country's participating broadcaster by 15 March, and the final submission date for all selected entries to be received by the contest organisers was set for 29 March. This submission was required to include a sound recording of the entry and backing track for use during the contest, a video presentation of the song on stage being performed by the artists, and the text of the song lyrics in its original language and translations in French and English for distribution to the participating broadcasters, their commentators and juries.

For the first time since the 1976 contest the participants had full freedom to perform in any language, and not simply that of the country they represented. This led to a marked increase in the number of entries which were performed in English. Additionally, the rules were modified to make the orchestra a non-obligatory feature of the contest of which organising broadcasters were free to opt out. IBA chose not to provide an orchestra, with all entries subsequently being performed with backing tracks, and no orchestra has been included as part of the competition since.

Following the confirmation of the twenty-three competing countries, the draw to determine the running order was held on 17 November 1998.


Voting procedure

The results of the 1999 contest were determined using the scoring system introduced in 1975: each country awarded twelve points to its favourite entry, followed by ten points to its second favourite, and then awarded points in decreasing value from eight to one for the remaining songs which featured in the country's top ten, with countries unable to vote for their own entry. Each participating broadcaster was required to use televoting to determine their points, with viewers able to register their vote by telephone for a total of five minutes following the performance of the last competing entry. Viewers could vote by calling one of twenty-two different telephone numbers to represent the twenty-three competing entries except that which represented their own country. Once phone lines were opened a video recap containing short clips of each competing entry with the accompanying phone number for voting was shown in order to aid viewers during the voting window. Systems were also put in place to prevent lobby groups from one country voting for their entry by travelling to other countries.

Participating broadcasters which were unable to hold a televote in its country due to technological limitations were granted an exception, and their points were determined by an assembled jury of eight individuals, which was required to be split evenly between members of the public and music professionals, comprised additionally of an equal number of men and women, and below and above 30 years of age. Participating broadcasters using televoting were also required to appoint a back-up jury of the same composition which would be called into action upon technical failure preventing the televote results from being used. Each jury member voted in secret and awarded between one and ten votes to each participating song, excluding that from their own country and with no abstentions permitted. The votes of each member were collected following the country's performance and then tallied by the non-voting jury chairperson to determine the points to be awarded. In any cases where two or more songs in the top ten received the same number of votes, a show of hands by all jury members was used to determine the final placing; if a tie still remained, the youngest jury member would have the deciding vote.


Postcards

Each entry was preceded by a video postcard which served as an introduction to each country, as well as providing an opportunity to showcase the running artistic theme of the event and to create a transition between entries to allow stage crew to make changes on stage. The postcards for the 1999 contest featured animations of paintings of biblical stories which transitioned into footage of modern locations in Israel or clips representing specific themes related to contemporary Israeli culture and industries. The various locations or themes for each postcard are listed below by order of performance:

Lithuania – Jacob's Ladder; Israel Museum, Jerusalem

Belgium – Pharaoh and his Army; Eilat

Spain – Noah's Ark; landscapes of Galilee

Croatia – Ruth; Israeli agriculture

United Kingdom – Jonah and the Whale; Jaffa

Slovenia – Adam and Eve; Israeli fashion

Turkey – The Sea of Galilee; Tiberias and surroundings

Norway – Workers of the Tabernacle; Israeli tech and virtual reality

Denmark – Joseph and His Brothers; Haifa

France – The Golden Calf; Israeli jewellery industry

Netherlands – The Prophet; Tel Aviv nightlife

Poland – David and Goliath; Israeli sports

Iceland – The Manna from Heaven; Israeli culinary

Cyprus – The Basket of Moses; rafting on the Jordan River

Sweden – David and Bathsheba; music and art on the roofs of Tel Aviv

Portugal – Daniel and the Lions; Acre

Ireland – Cain and Abel; Judaean Desert

Austria – The Judgement of Solomon; Jerusalem

Israel – The Promised Land; Jezreel Valley

Malta – David and Michal; Suzanne Dellal Centre for Dance and Theatre, Tel Aviv

Germany – The Tower of Babel; Israeli beaches

Bosnia and Herzegovina – Samson; Caesarea National Park

Estonia – The Zodiac mosaic at the Old Beth Alfa Synagogue; love at the Dead Sea


Contest overview

The contest took place on 29 May 1999 at 22:00 (IST) and lasted 3 hours and 13 minutes.

The show began with a computer animation entitled "From Birmingham to Jerusalem", highlighting the contest's journey from last year's host country the United Kingdom to Israel, and containing notable landmarks and features of the competing countries; the animation then transitioned into recorded footage of Jerusalem including dancers and hosts Dekel and Shachmon. The contest's opening segment also featured Izhar Cohen and Gali Atari, previous Eurovision winning artists for Israel in 1978 and in 1979 attending as special guests, and the previous year's co-presenter Terry Wogan in attendance as the United Kingdom's television commentator. A pause between entries was included for the first time to allow broadcasters to provide advertisements during the show; placed between the Polish and Icelandic entries, a performance of the song "To Life" from the musical Fiddler on the Roof featuring co-presenters Dekel and Shachmon was provided for the benefit of the audience in the arena and for non-commercial broadcasters.

The contest's pre-recorded interval act entitled "Freedom Calls", shown following the final competing entry and during the voting window, was staged outside the Walls of Jerusalem and the Tower of David and featured performances by a troupe of dancers, a chorus and Dana International singing the D'ror Yikra and a cover of "Free", originally recorded by Stevie Wonder. Following the traditional reprise performance of the winning song, the show finished with a performance of the English version of Israel's 1979 contest winning song "Hallelujah", which included all the competing artists and was featured as a tribute to the victims of the then-ongoing Kosovo War and to the people of the Balkans impacted.

The winner was Sweden represented by the song "Take Me to Your Heaven", composed by Lars Diedricson, written by Gert Lengstrand and Marcos Ubeda and performed by Charlotte Nilsson. This marked Sweden's fourth victory in the contest, following wins in 1974, 1984, and 1991, and occurred 25 years after ABBA brought Sweden its first victory. Iceland, Croatia, and Bosnia and Herzegovina also achieved their best results to date, placing second, fourth and seventh respectively.

During the presentation of the trophy to the contest winners, Dana International caused a security alert in the auditorium as while lifting the trophy she lost her balance and fell to the stage along with the winning songwriters before being helped up by security agents.

The Norwegian delegation raised an objection to the use of simulated male vocals during the performance of Croatian entry "Marija Magdalena". Following the contest this was found to have contravened the contest rules regarding the use of vocals on the backing tracks, and Croatia were sanctioned by the EBU with the loss of 33% of its points for the purpose of calculating its average points total for qualification in following contests. The country's position and points at this contest however remain unchanged.

The table below outlines the participating countries, the order in which they performed, the competing artists and songs, and the results of the voting.


Spokespersons

Each participating broadcaster appointed a spokesperson who was responsible for announcing, in English or French, the votes for its respective country. As had been the case since the 1994 contest, the spokespersons were connected via satellite and appeared in vision during the broadcast; spokespersons at the 1999 contest are listed below.

Iceland – Áslaug Dóra Eyjólfsdóttir

Bosnia and Herzegovina – Segmedina Srna


Detailed voting results

Televoting was used to determine the points awarded by all countries, except Lithuania, Turkey, Ireland, and Bosnia and Herzegovina. Ireland had intended to use televoting, however technical failures at Telecom Éireann ahead of the voting window meant that the majority of calls were not registered and the country's back-up jury was utilised to determine its points.

The announcement of the results from each country was conducted in the order in which they performed, with the spokespersons announcing their country's points in English or French in ascending order. The detailed breakdown of the points awarded by each country is listed in the tables below.


12 points

The below table summarises how the maximum 12 points were awarded from one country to another. The winning country is shown in bold. Germany and Sweden each received the maximum score of 12 points from five countries, with Iceland receiving three sets of 12 points, Croatia and Slovenia receiving two sets each, and Bosnia and Herzegovina, Denmark, Ireland, Netherlands, Portugal, and Turkey each receiving one maximum score.


Broadcasts

Each participating broadcaster was required to relay live and in full the contest via television. Non-participating EBU member broadcasters were also able to relay the contest as "passive participants"; any passive countries wishing to participate in the following year's event were also required to provide a live broadcast of the contest or a deferred broadcast within 24 hours. Broadcasters were able to send commentators to provide coverage of the contest in their own native language and to relay information about the artists and songs to their television viewers. These commentators were typically sent to the venue to report on the event, and were able to provide commentary from small booths constructed at the back of the venue.

The contest was reportedly watched by 150 million viewers. Known details on the broadcasts in each country, including the specific broadcasting stations and commentators, are shown in the tables below.


Other awards


Barbara Dex Award

The Barbara Dex Award, created in 1997 by fansite House of Eurovision, was awarded to the performer deemed to have been the "worst dressed" among the participants. The winner in 1999 was Spain's representative Lydia, as determined by visitors to the House of Eurovision website. This was the first edition of the award to be determined by site visitors, as the winners in 1997 and 1998 had been chosen by the founders of the House of Eurovision site Edwin van Thillo and Rob Paardekam.