Eurovision Song Contest 1969




Location

Televisión Española (TVE) staged the 1969 contest in Madrid, after winning the 1968 contest for Spain with the song "La La La" by Massiel. This is the only time that the contest has been held in Spain. The venue selected was the Teatro Real, an opera house opened in 1850. After having to close in 1924 due to damage to the building, the venue reopened in 1966 as a concert hall and the main concert venue of the Spanish National Orchestra and the RTVE Symphony Orchestra. At that time, it also housed the Madrid Royal Conservatory and the Royal Higher College of Performing Arts.

The press room set up for the event, equipped with a colour Eidophor projector and a giant screen, twelve television monitors, telex, teletype, and telefax machines, telephones, one hundred typewriters with different keyboards, translation services, and a radio studio, was located within the building and had capacity for six hundred journalists.

On 27 March 1969, the Club Internacional de Prensa hosted a cocktail reception at its Madrid facilities, presided over by Manuel Fraga, the Minister of Information and Tourism on whom TVE depended at the time, and attended by all the participating artists, executives from the participating broadcasters, numerous accredited journalists, and local authorities.


Participants

Broadcasters from sixteen countries participated in the 1969 contest. Of the seventeen countries that participated in 1968 only Austria was absent, officially because Österreichischer Rundfunk (ORF) could not find a suitable representative, but it was rumoured that the broadcaster refused to participate in a contest staged in Franco-ruled Spain.

Several of the performing artists had previously represented the same country in past editions: Simone de Oliveira had represented Portugal in 1965; Kirsti Sparboe had represented Norway in 1965 and in 1967; and Louis Neefs had represented Belgium in 1967. In addition, Siw Malmkvist representing Germany had represented Sweden in 1960; and Romuald representing Luxembourg had represented Monaco in 1964.


Production and format

The event was presented by Laurita Valenzuela, who was dressed for the occasion by Carmen Mir . The surrealist artist Salvador Dalí designed the poster for the contest. The musical director was Augusto Algueró, who made the arrangements and conducted the 52-piece orchestra during the opening and ending acts. Each competing delegation was allowed to appoint its own conductor to lead the orchestra in the performance of its entry, with the host musical director also conducting for those which did not bring their own conductor. The event was overseen on behalf of the European Broadcasting Union (EBU) by Clifford Brown as scrutineer. The draw to determine the running order took place in late 1968 in London.

The event had a budget of around 5 million pesetas (€30,050). For the set built on the Teatro Real stage, the TVE scenography divisions in Madrid and Barcelona, headed by Bernardo Ballester, designed ten different proposals and built a scale model for each of them. These were shortlisted into three designs for further consideration, from which one was selected. The final design included the 5,000-pipe fixed organ already present at the back of the stage, a central steel sculpture created by surrealist artist Amadeo Gabino , a scoreboard on the side, and fifteen thousand red and pink carnations. Since they were not allowed to make any modifications to the stage, not even hammering a nail into it, the set was prefabricated in more than three hundred modules that, brought from Prado del Rey, were assembled on-site. For better visibility, the floor of the set was raised 1 metre (3 ft 3 in) above the stage.

TVE had full access to the concert hall starting from the evening of 16 March 1969, immediately after the audience and staff of that day's regular season concert had left the venue, which allowed its stage crew to begin assembling the set right away, its technical crew to begin setting up the equipment afterwards, and the orchestra to start rehearsals on 22 March. The rehearsals of the competing delegations on stage with the orchestra took place on 26 and 27 March, eight each day following the established running order for the competition. A full dress rehearsal was held on the evening of 28 March which included the voting process with simulated votes and a tie for first place. Technical rehearsals were held on the morning of 29 March, followed by a dress rehearsal in the afternoon ahead of the live broadcast that evening.

This was the second contest to be filmed and transmitted in colour, even though TVE did not have the required colour equipment for such a big event at the time. It had to rent such equipment from the German ARD, which was provided by Fernseh and brought to Madrid from Cologne. Five colour television cameras inside the concert hall, three of them mounted on cranes, were used to broadcast the event. To avoid interruptions in the broadcast, the television signal was transmitted to the other broadcasters feeding the Eurovision network by two simultaneous ways: via the terrestrial microwave relay link network through France, and via the Intelsat III F-2 satellite through Italy. In addition, 137 dedicated telephone lines were used for transmission, internal communication, and communication with the participating broadcasters. In Spain itself the broadcast was seen in black and white because the local transmitters did not support colour transmissions. The colour recording equipment did not arrive in Madrid on time, so TVE only had a black and white copy of the contest, until a colour copy was discovered in the archives of NRK.


Contest overview

The contest was held on 29 March 1969 at 22:00 CET. The show opened with a rendition of the Eurovision tune by the Teatro Real organ, followed by the orchestra performing the previous year's winning song, "La, la, la". The interval act consisted of a surrealist documentary titled La España diferente, directed by Javier Aguirre, with music by Luis de Pablo. The show ended with the orchestra performing a medley of previous Eurovision winning songs during the credits.

The winners were: Spain with "Vivo cantando", written by Aniano Alcalde and María José de Cerato, and performed by Salomé; the United Kingdom with "Boom Bang-a-Bang", written by Alan Moorhouse and Peter Warne, and performed by Lulu; the Netherlands with "De troubadour", written by David Hartsema and Lenny Kuhr, and performed by Kuhr herself; and France with "Un jour, un enfant", written by Eddy Marnay and Émile Stern, and performed by Frida Boccara.

It was the first time that the contest resulted in a tie for first place, with the four entries each gaining 18 votes. Since the rules in place at the time allowed more than one winner, all four were declared joint winners ex aequo. This caused a problem concerning the medals that were to be distributed to them, as there were not enough to go round, so only the singers received their medals on stage; the songwriters were not awarded theirs until later. The medals were presented by previous year's winner Massiel, after which all four winning songs were reprised.


Spokespersons

Each participating broadcaster appointed a spokesperson who was responsible for announcing the votes for their respective jury via telephone. Known spokespersons at the 1969 contest are listed below.


Detailed voting results

Every participating broadcaster assembled a jury panel of ten people. Every jury member could give one vote to his or her favourite song, except that representing their own country. This means that any song could receive a maximum of 10 votes from a national jury, but none achieved this. The highest number of votes a song received from a jury was six, which went to the song from the Netherlands.

Although neither spokesperson made any errors in their announcements, EBU scrutineer Clifford Brown asked both the Spanish and the Monegasque spokespersons to repeat their votes. No adjustments were made to the scoring as a result of the repetition.


Broadcasts

Each participating broadcaster was required to relay the contest live via its networks after receiving it through the Eurovision network. Non-participating EBU member broadcasters were also able to relay the contest as "passive participants". Broadcasters were able to send commentators to provide coverage of the contest in their own native language and to relay information about the artists and songs to their television viewers. In addition to the participating countries, the contest was also reportedly broadcast in 26 countries including Tunisia; in Bulgaria, Czechoslovakia, East Germany, Hungary, Poland, Romania, and the Soviet Union received via Intervision; and in Brazil, Chile, Mexico, Panama, and Puerto Rico. 30 radio and television commentators are reported to be present at the contest, with an estimated global audience of 250 to 400 million viewers.

Known details on the broadcasts in each country, including the specific broadcasting stations and commentators are shown in the tables below.