Eurovision Song Contest 1983




Location

Munich is a German city and capital of the Bavarian state. Rudi-Sedlmayer-Halle was chosen to host the contest. The hall opened in 1972 to host basketball events for the 1972 Summer Olympics. Due to staging and production necessities, the 5,500 seats of the arena had to be reduced to 3,200 for the night of the final and until the 1985 contest, this was the largest arena to host the event. From this number, 2,000 seats were reserved for the delegations and journalists, and 1,200 tickets were on sale for the general public. The ticket prices ranged from 20 to 50 DM.


Participants

Twenty countries took part in the contest, with France, Greece, and Italy returning to the competition. On the other hand, Ireland was absent this year for the first time since its debut in 1965 because of the financial difficulties of the national broadcaster, Radio Telefís Éireann (RTÉ).

Several of the performing artists had previously competed as lead artists representing the same country in past editions: Guy Bonnet had represented France in 1970; and Jahn Teigen had represented Norway in 1978, and in 1982 along Anita Skorgan. In addition, Sandra Reemer, who had represented the Netherlands in 1972 along with Andres Holten, in 1976, and in 1979; Anita Skorgan who represented Norway in 1977, in 1979, in 1982 along Jahn Teigen, and provided backing vocals in 1981; and Izolda Barudžija, who represented Yugoslavia in 1982 as part of Aska; provided backing vocals for the same country in this contest.


Production

The local production of the contest started in June 1982. The final was produced by Bayerischer Rundfunk (BR) on behalf of ARD, with production costs of 1.2 million DM, further 1.5 million DM for the organisation and broadcaster, making a total of 2.7 million DM. With the help of donations and other contributions, Bayerischer Rundfunk was able to reduce the costs at its own expense to about 1 million DM. The city of Munich had to contribute 60,000 DM to a reception for the participating delegations.

The contest was directed by Rainer Bertram . Dieter Reith served as the general musical director of the 60-piece orchestra. Christian Hayer and Günther Lebram served as the executive producers. Other leading figures in the production included Wolf Mittler, Sylvia de Bruycker, Christof Schmid and Joachim Krausz. Rehearsals started on 18 April 1983.


Stage design

The stage was designed by Hans Gailling . The set was an arc-shaped stage surrounding the orchestra section and had a size of 4 by 34 metres (13 ft × 112 ft). A 26 metres (85 ft) large and 7 metres (23 ft) high steel construction with frames resembling giant electric heaters was used as the background. The 33 frames were equipped with three light panels each, at which hundreds of light bulbs were suspended. In total, 63,000 light bulbs, which could be controlled manually or by sound frequency, lit up and flashed in different sequences and combinations depending on the nature and rhythm of the songs.


Format

Various receptions and events were organised in the week leading up to the final. On 19 April 1983, a cruise on Lake Starnberg with several participants was held by the German National Tourist Board as a press event for 250 journalists. The Tourist Board also organised a bus tour for several participants to Linderhof Palace and Garmisch-Partenkirchen on 20 April 1983. On 19 April 1983, a reception for the participants was held at the Antiquarium in the Munich Residenz, on behalf of Franz Josef Strauss, minister-president of the state of Bavaria. Parties and receptions for the artists were also organised by the record labels Ariola, Polydor and Deutsche Grammophon. Ralph Siegel, composer of the winning entry for Germany in 1982, and his own record label Jupiter Records , held a party for 1,000 guests, including many artists, on 21 April 1983.

A press centre with television monitors, typewriters, telephones and paper notebooks was installed for the 600 journalists covering the event.

German Bundespost installed a post office from 18 to 23 April at the Rudi-Sedlmayr-Halle and stamped letters from there with a special Eurovision Song Contest postmark.


Presentation format

Instead of pre-filmed "postcards", the production team for this edition chose not to produce the postcards for technical reasons. During the change of the stage elements, the name of the next country was shown on screen accompanied by music from the orchestra, followed by a presentation of the upcoming entry by Marlene Charell.

After the first rehearsals, the Austrian and British commentators complained that, since there were no postcards, they felt that there was not enough time to introduce the upcoming entry to their viewers, and subsequently threatened to withdraw from the contest. As a reaction, for the live show and latter rehearsals, the name of the upcoming country was shown on screen for a certain time so that commentators had enough time.

For the introduction of each entry, Charell stood in front of individual flower arrangements with flowers in the colours of the corresponding entry’s national flag. The floral arrangements were provided by the International Garden Expo 83 organization, as the event was also scheduled to start five days after the contest. Hostess Marlene Charell made all of her announcements in German before translating a repetition in both French and English. In all three languages, Charell named the country, song title, performing artist, author, composer and conductor. The decision not to use postcards apparently left Marlene lost during the event, as she would have to use three languages to introduce each of the participants.

Due to host Charell's use of three languages, the voting went on for nearly an hour, stretching the Eurovision contest past three hours for the second time ever, the first after 1979. In addition, Charell made 13 language mistakes throughout the night, some as innocuous as mixing up the words for "points" between the three languages, some as major as nearly awarding points to "Schweden" (Sweden) that were meant for "Schweiz" (Switzerland).

The language problems also occurred during the contest introductions, as Charell mispronounced the Finnish singer Ami Aspelund's surname as "Aspesund", Spanish singer Remedios Amaya's name as "Ramedios" and Portuguese singer Armando Gama's name as "Armendo". Furthermore, she introduced the Norwegian conductor Sigurd Jansen as "...Johannes...Skorgan...", and Yugoslavian conductor Radovan Papović as "Rodovan Popović" having been forced to make up a name on the spot after forgetting the conductor's name.


Contest overview

The contest took place on 23 April 1983, beginning at 21:00 CEST (19:00 UTC). At the start of the broadcast, a 7-minutes-long film with views of various sights of Germany and of the host city Munich was shown. As part of the introduction, a parade of nations was called by the presenter Marlene Charell. The interval act was a dance number set to a medley of German songs which had become internationally famous, including "Strangers in the Night". The host Marlene Charell was the lead dancer accompanied by her ballet with 20 dancers from her company.

Considered the big favourite of the night by the press, the Luxembourgish entry did not enjoy the same prestige among the local public who considered it a bad joke, and this was reflected in a series of hostilities from the public in Munich, to the point that the show director Rainer Bertram and Roger Kreischer, their counterpart at the Luxembourgish broadcaster RTL, openly criticized the mocking tone of the local media and the public present at the venue towards the Luxembourgish entry. It was famously seen during the broadcast that a good part of the public present at the contest site voluntarily left during the performance of Corinne Hermès, which according to the draw was the last of the 20 participating songs. Other embarrassing reactions towards the Luxembourgish participant were recorded during the voting. Each time the name Luxembourg was announced by the jury spokespeople from each country, laughters and some joking words were heard and when high scores appeared, boos and another low slangs ensued. When Corinne Hermès performed her reprise, a great part of the audience was already leaving.

After the show, a reception for 1,600 guests on behalf of the city of Munich took place in a tent of the International Garden Expo 83.


Spokespersons

Each participating broadcaster appointed a spokesperson who was responsible for announcing the votes for its respective country via telephone. Known spokespersons at the 1983 contest are listed below.


Detailed voting results

Each participating broadcaster assembled a jury consisting of 11 non-professional jurors who awarded 12, 10, 8, 7, 6, 5, 4, 3, 2, 1 point(s) to their top ten songs.


12 points

Below is a summary of all 12 points in the final:


Broadcasts

Each participating broadcaster was required to relay the contest via its networks. Non-participating EBU member broadcasters were also able to relay the contest as "passive participants". Broadcasters were able to send commentators to provide coverage of the contest in their own native language and to relay information about the artists and songs to their television viewers. Host broadcaster BR provided 30 commentator boxes for this purpose.

The contest was reportedly broadcast in 30 countries, including the Eastern Bloc countries, Jordan and Hong Kong. No official accounts of the global viewing figures are known to exist, with estimates given in the press at the time ranging from 300 to 600 million viewers. Known details on the broadcasts in each country, including the specific broadcasting stations and commentators are shown in the tables below.