Eurovision Song Contest 2011




Location

The contest took place in Düsseldorf, the seventh-largest city in Germany. This was the first contest to take place outside the host nation's capital city since the 2004 contest in Istanbul. It was also the first Eurovision Song Contest held in Germany since German reunification, with West Germany having previously hosted the contest in 1957 and 1983. Germany was also the first country of the "Big Five" to host the contest since the implementation of the rule in 2000 that permits the five countries whose broadcasters are the largest contributors to the EBU – Germany, France, the United Kingdom, Spain, and Italy – to qualify automatically for the final alongside the previous year's winner.

The Esprit Arena, a multi-functional football stadium, hosted the contest. The stadium acquired a rental period of six weeks, in order to allow construction and dismantling work in relation to the contest to be carried out. The arena accommodated 35,000 spectators during the contest. Düsseldorf offered 23,000 hotel beds and 2,000 additional beds in the Düsseldorf surroundings and on ships on the River Rhine.


Bidding phase

Twenty-three cities submit official bids to Norddeutscher Rundfunk (NDR), in order to be the host city for the 2011 contest. Eight of these cities continued to show interest in hosting the event including Berlin, Hamburg, Hanover, Gelsenkirchen, Düsseldorf, Cologne, Frankfurt, and Munich. NDR announced on 21 August 2010 that four of those cities had officially applied to host the 2011 contest: Berlin, Hamburg, Hanover, and Düsseldorf. On 2 October 2010 the Hamburger Abendblatt newspaper announced that Hamburg would be unable to host the 2011 Song Contest, because the city could no longer fulfil the required financial conditions.

Concerns were raised about Berlin's bid concept which consisted of an inflatable tent to be built on Tempelhof's hangar area. Decision makers at NDR reportedly doubted the venue's ability to provide advantageous acoustic conditions. Berlin's speaker Richard Meng neither confirmed nor denied that because, he stated, "secrecy about the bid concepts was promised to the NDR".

On 24 September 2010, it was announced that Fortuna Düsseldorf football club had applied to the Deutsche Fußball Liga for permission to move its home matches to the Paul-Janes-Stadion if the Düsseldorf Arena was awarded the Song Contest. This message indicated that talks with Düsseldorf to host the song contest in the Düsseldorf Arena were already at an advanced stage. The club later announced on 6 October 2010 that it had obtained permission to move its games if necessary. The Neue Ruhr Zeitung newspaper reported on 12 December 2010 that Fortuna Düsseldorf were to be moved to the Paul-Janes-Stadion due to the contest, however it was later decided Fortuna Düsseldorf's training venue next to the Düsseldorf Arena would be equipped with mobile stands from a Swiss event construction specialist, Nussli Group, creating 20,000 extra seats, the decision being made for logistical purposes. The stadium would be named the Lena-Arena and host the remaining 3 home games of Fortuna Düsseldorf's 2. Bundesliga campaign.

On 12 October 2010, NDR announced that the Düsseldorf Arena had been chosen as the host venue for the 2011 Eurovision Song Contest.

Key † Host venue


Participants

On 31 December 2010, it was confirmed that 43 countries would compete in the 2011 contest. The 2011 edition saw the returns of Austria, which had last participated in 2007; Italy, which had last participated in 1997; San Marino, which had only taken part in 2008; and Hungary, which had last participated in 2009. Montenegro had applied to take part in the contest on 4 December, but decided against participation and withdrew on 23 December, two days before 25 December no-strings-attached deadline.

Slovenská televízia (STV) announced its withdrawal from the 2011 contest due to financial reasons, despite holding a public poll on its website on its Eurovision participation which received an 87.5% positive vote. STV announced that it planned to return in the 2012 contest. However, Slovakia's application remained on the provisional list, leading to its participation in the 2011 contest. STV announced in January 2011 that it would yet withdraw from the contest, citing to financial reasons and organisational changes. However it was listed by the EBU as one of the semi-finalist countries in the semi-final allocation draw on 17 January, and STV later confirmed it would continue its participation to avoid a fine for a late withdrawal.

At a meeting in Belgrade on 28 August 2010, the EBU decided that each country had to choose its artist and song before 14 March 2011. On 15 March 2011, the draw for the running order took place in the host city. The semi-final allocation draw took place on 17 January in Düsseldorf.

Several of the performing artists had previously represented the same country in past editions, including Dino Merlin, who had represented Bosnia and Herzegovina in 1999. Gunnar Ólason, a member of Sjonni's Friends, had represented Iceland in 2001 as part of Two Tricky. Zdob și Zdub had represented Moldova in 2005. Sophio Toroshelidze, the lead singer of Eldrine, had provided backing vocals for Georgia in 2010. In addition, TWiiNS representing Slovakia, had provided backing vocals for the Czech Republic in 2008.

Along with those artists, two previous Eurovision winners also returned to the contest: Dana International who won the contest for Israel in 1998, and Lena who won for Germany in 2010 and brought the contest to Düsseldorf. Stefan Raab, who represented Germany in 2000 and appeared as a conductor and backing artist for other German entries, hosted the contest. This was the first time since 1958 and only the second time in the history of the contest that two former winners returned on the same year.


Format

The four countries that were part of the "Big Four", along with the host of the contest, automatically qualify for a place in the grand final. Since Germany was both a "Big Four" country and the host for the 2011 contest, there was a vacant spot in the grand final. At a Reference Group meeting in Belgrade it was decided that the existing rules would remain in place, and that the number of participants in the grand final would simply be lowered from twenty-five to twenty-four. On 31 December 2010, the official participation list was published by the EBU, which stipulated that with the return of Italy to the contest, the nation would become a member of the newly expanded "Big Five". This change permitted Italy automatic qualification into the grand final, alongside France, Spain, the United Kingdom and host nation Germany, restoring the number of participants for the grand final to twenty-five nations.

On 30 August 2010, it was announced that Svante Stockselius, Executive Supervisor of the Eurovision Song Contest, would be leaving his position on 31 December 2010. On 26 November 2010, the EBU announced that Jon Ola Sand would succeed Stockselius as Executive Supervisor.


Semi-final allocation draw

The draw to determine the semi-final running orders was held on 17 January 2011. All of the participating countries excluding the automatic finalists were split into six pots, based on the voting history of those countries in previous years. From these pots, half (or as close to half as was possible) competed in the first semi-final on 10 May 2011. The other half in that particular pot competed in the second semi-final on 12 May 2011. This draw doubled as an approximate running order, in order for the delegations from the countries to know when their rehearsals commenced. The draw also determined in which of the semi-finals the automatic finalists would be able to cast their votes.

Israeli broadcaster IBA requested to compete in the second semi-final, rather than the first semi-final that was pulled in the draw, due to Israel's Memorial Day coinciding with the first semi-final. German broadcaster NDR also requested that it be allowed to vote in the second semi-final for scheduling reasons.


Graphic design

The design of the contest was built around the slogan "Feel Your Heart Beat", with the logo and on-screen graphics designed by Turquoise Branding. The postcard introducing each performance included the logo in the colours of the performing country (e.g. the United Kingdom in red, white and blue); then a German place was shown in a toy-like view using tilt-shift photography and a story happened there, whose main characters were people either living in Germany or tourists from that country. The contest's motto, 'Feel your heart beat', was then shown or said in the country's national or native language. For example, in the first postcard shown (Poland's), the boyfriend drops a piece of paper. The camera then pans down to the paper, to show the Polish phrase "Poczuj bicie serca" handwritten on it. In the second postcard shown (Norway's), a mountain climber from Norway climbs to the top of a mountain and yells the Norwegian phrase "Kjenn ditt hjerte slå.". Then, the heart appeared once again, and the stage and the crowd could be seen, with heartbeat sounds and pink lights pulsating in rhythm with the heartbeat, before the performance started.

The main colours of the letterboxes were black and pink. The scoreboard showed a spokesperson from the country giving their votes on the right, while showing a table of results on the left. The large points (8, 10 and 12) were highlighted in pink, whilst the lower points, (1–7) were in purple. This scoreboard design was used again the following year, with minor changes such as the large points appearing progressively larger in size compared to the lower points and the highlighted colours changed to match the 2012 theme, "Light your fire!"


Host broadcaster


Hosts

On 16 December 2010, NDR announced that Anke Engelke, Judith Rakers, and Stefan Raab were to be the presenters for the contest. It was the third time three people would host the contest, the previous such contests being 1999 and 2010. Raab had represented Germany in 2000 with "Wadde hadde dudde da?", whereas Engelke is an actress and comedian, and Rakers a journalist and television presenter.


Event concept and ticket sale

On 13 October 2010 Thomas Schreiber, coordinator at ARD, outlined details of Düsseldorf's event concept. The Düsseldorf Arena was to be split in two parts separated from each other. On one side of the stadium the stage would be installed while the other side would function as background dressing rooms for the artist delegations. An athletics arena next to the Düsseldorf Arena would serve as the press centre for the event. The Düsseldorf Arena offered comfortable seats relatively near to the stage that created an indoor event arena atmosphere rather than a football-stadium ambiance. There were plans to allow the public the chance to attend the dress rehearsals. Altogether, tickets were sold for seven shows (the grand final, two semi-finals and four dress rehearsals).

He also said in that interview that tickets for the event were likely to go on sale "within the next four weeks" (by mid-November 2010). NDR had already opened a preregistration e-mail-newsletter on its website for all people interested in tickets for the event.

Ticket sales started on 12 December 2010 at 12:12 CET on the website www.dticket.de, the only authorised seller. However, the ticket page opened for sales approximately two hours earlier than originally advertised; this announcement was made by an email newsletter sent to preregistered buyers minutes before opening, giving them a slight benefit in acquiring tickets. The grand final 32,000 tickets that were put on sale on 12 December sold out in less than six hours. Once camera positions had been determined, a few thousand extra tickets were put on sale.

Tickets for the semi-finals were put on sale in mid-January, when it was known which countries would take part in each semi-final.


Contest overview


Semi-final 1

The first semi-final took place on 10 May 2011 at 21:00 CEST. All the countries competing in this semi-final were eligible to vote, plus Spain and the United Kingdom. The ten countries in this semi-final with the highest scoring points, according to a combination of televotes and jury votes from each voting country, qualified for the grand final.

Multiple broadcasters lost contact with their commentators during this semi-final due to a technical glitch. Dropouts in the multi-channel sound connections were the cause of this fault, which was corrected with a backup system put in place and tested extensively before the second semi-final. Some commentators phoned their broadcaster to get their voice on television and radio broadcasts during the semi-final.


Semi-final 2

The second semi-final took place on 12 May 2011 at 21:00 CEST. All the countries competing in this semi-final were eligible to vote, plus France, Germany and Italy. The ten countries in this semi-final with the highest scoring points, according to a combination of televotes and jury votes from each voting country, qualified for the grand final.


Final

The final took place on 14 May 2011 at 21:00 CEST and was won by Azerbaijan. Only the "Big Five" countries automatically qualified for the grand final. From the two semi-finals on 10 and 12 May 2011, twenty countries qualified for the grand final. A total of 25 countries competed in the final and all 43 participants voted. The voting system used was the same as in the 2010 contest, with a combination of televotes and jury votes selecting the winner. Viewers were able to vote during the performances; the voting window ended 15 minutes after the conclusion of the songs.

Background music for the show included "Wonderful" by Gary Go.

Azerbaijan won with 221 points, also winning the televote. Italy (who won the jury vote) came second with 189 points, with Sweden, Ukraine, Denmark, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Greece, Ireland, Georgia and Germany completing the top ten. Finland, Hungary, Spain, Estonia and Switzerland occupied the bottom five positions.

Each participating broadcaster appointed a spokesperson who was responsible for announcing, in English or French, the votes for its respective country. Unlike previous years, the voting order was not drawn with the order of presentation of songs. Rather, the voting order was calculated just before the event, to reduce the likelihood of there being an outright winner from the start. Countries revealed their votes in the following order:

Iceland – Ragnhildur Steinunn Jónsdóttir

Bosnia and Herzegovina – Ivana Vidmar


Detailed voting results

The split jury/televoting results were announced by the EBU after the final. As in 2010, only the split totals received by each country were given, not the full breakdown.


Semi-final 1

Below is a summary of the maximum 12 points each country awarded to another in the first semi-final:


Semi-final 2

Below is a summary of the maximum 12 points each country awarded to another in the second semi-final:


Final

Below is a summary of the maximum 12 points each country awarded to another in the grand final:

A record number of 20 countries received at least one set of 12 points during the grand final. The only countries not to receive full marks were Estonia, Russia, Switzerland, Germany and Serbia.


Broadcasts

Most countries sent commentators to Düsseldorf or commentated from their own country, in order to add insight to the participants and, if necessary, the provision of voting information.


Other awards

In addition to the main winner's trophy, the Marcel Bezençon Awards and the Barbara Dex Award were contested during the 2011 Eurovision Song Contest. The OGAE, "General Organisation of Eurovision Fans" voting poll also took place before the contest.


Marcel Bezençon Awards

The Marcel Bezençon Awards, organised since 2002 by Sweden's then-Head of Delegation and 1992 representative Christer Björkman, and 1984 winner Richard Herrey, honours songs in the contest's final. The awards are divided into three categories: Artistic Award, Composers Award, and Press Award.


OGAE

OGAE, an organisation of over forty Eurovision Song Contest fan clubs across Europe and beyond, conducts an annual voting poll first held in 2002 as the Marcel Bezençon Fan Award. After all votes were cast, the top-ranked entry in the 2011 poll was Hungary's "What About My Dreams?" performed by Kati Wolf; the top five results are shown below.


Barbara Dex Award

The Barbara Dex Award is a humorous fan award given to the worst dressed artist each year. Named after Belgium's representative who came last in the 1993 contest, wearing her self-designed dress, the award was handed by the fansite House of Eurovision from 1997 to 2016 and is being carried out by the fansite songfestival.be since 2017.


Official album

Eurovision Song Contest: Düsseldorf 2011 was the official compilation album of the 2011 contest, put together by the European Broadcasting Union and released by EMI Records and CMC International on 15 April 2011. The album featured all 43 songs that entered in the 2011 contest, including the semi-finalists that failed to qualify into the grand final.


Charts