Eurovision Song Contest 2000




Location

The 2000 contest took place in Stockholm, Sweden, following the country's victory at the 1999 edition with the song "Take Me to Your Heaven", performed by Charlotte Nilsson. It was the fourth time that Sweden had staged the contest, following the 1975, 1985 and 1992 contests held in Stockholm, Gothenburg, and Malmö, respectively. The selected venue was the Stockholm Globe Arena, also known as Globen in Swedish, an indoor arena first opened in 1989 and the world's largest hemispherical building. With capacity for over 16,000 people, which was reduced slightly to 13,000 for the contest, the Globe Arena was the largest venue the Eurovision Song Contest had ever seen at that point.

Host broadcaster Sveriges Television (SVT) approached venues in three cities – namely Gothenburg, Malmö and Stockholm – to establish a suitable host city and venue for the contest. The venues chosen following this initial round of discussions were the Scandinavium in Gothenburg, which had previously hosted the 1985 contest; Malmömässan in Malmö; and Globen in Stockholm. Malmö was subsequently eliminated as a potential host city, due to high costs required to complete a suitable arena within the Malmömässan area and which would still have a relatively small audience capacity compared to the other venues on offer. Of the remaining options, Stockholm and Globen were ultimately chosen by SVT managing director Sam Nilsson to host the event. Stockholm's bid won out over Gothenburg due to the lower costs of producing the event in the capital as well as with Stockholm having not hosted the event since 1975.


Participants

Per the rules of the contest twenty-four countries were allowed to participate in the 2000 contest, one more than the twenty-three countries that participated in the 1999 event. Latvia entered the contest for the first time, and Finland, Macedonia, Romania, Russia, and Switzerland returned after being absent from the previous year's event. 1999 participants Bosnia and Herzegovina, Lithuania, Poland, Portugal and Slovenia did not participate in this year's contest.

Several of the performing artists had previously competed as lead artists in past editions. Serafín Zubiri competed in the contest for a second time, having previously participated for Spain in 1992. Roger Pontare competed as a solo artist in this year's edition, following his appearance for Sweden in 1994 where he competed alongside Marie Bergman. The two members of the Cypriot duo Voice , Alexandros Panayi and Christina Argyri, had also both participated in Eurovision before, with Panayi having previously represented Cyprus in 1995, while Argyri had been a backing performer at the same contest. A number of former participating artists also returned to perform as backing vocalists for some of the competing entries: Eyjólfur Kristjánsson , having previously represented Iceland in 1991 alongside Stefán Hilmarsson , returned to support the Icelandic duo August and Telma as a backing singer; Albano Carrisi, who twice represented Italy in 1976 and 1985 with Romina Power as Al Bano and Romina Power, supported Switzerland's Jane Bogaert on stage; and Gabriel Forss , a member of the group Blond that represented Sweden in 1997, was a backing singer for Malta's Claudette Pace in this year's event. Additionally, Eamonn Toal competed for Ireland in this year's contest, having previously served as backing vocalist for Ireland in 1995.


Qualification

Due to the high number of countries wishing to enter the contest, a relegation system was introduced in 1993 in order to reduce the number of countries which could compete in each year's contest. Any relegated countries would be able to return the following year, thus allowing all countries the opportunity to compete in at least one in every two editions. The relegation rules introduced for the 1997 contest were again utilised ahead of the 2000 contest, based on each country's average points total in previous contests. However the rules were modified for 2000 to ensure that the four participating countries which provide the largest financial contribution towards the organisation of the contest would be given an automatic place in the contest every year. This group – comprising France, Germany, Spain and the United Kingdom – was subsequently dubbed the "Big Four" group of countries. Alongside the previous year's winning country and the Big Four, the remaining places in the 2000 contest were given to any eligible countries which had not competed in the 1999 contest, and the countries which had competed in 1999 that had obtained the highest average points total over the preceding five contests. In cases where the average was identical between two or more countries, the total number of points scored in the most recent contest determined the final order.

Bosnia and Herzegovina, Lithuania, Poland, Portugal and Slovenia were therefore excluded from participating in the 2000 contest, to make way for the return of Finland, Macedonia, Romania, Russia and Switzerland, and debuting country Latvia. Broadcasters in Greece, Hungary, and Slovakia, participating countries from the 1998 contest which had not competed in 1999, and were therefore eligible to participate in 2000, decided not to enter, reportedly due to financial reasons.

The calculations used to determine the countries relegated for the 2000 contest are outlined in the table below.

Table key


Production

The Eurovision Song Contest 2000 was produced SVT; Svante Stockselius served as executive producer, Peter Lundin served as producer, Marius Bratten served as director, and Mikael Varhelyi and Kristofer Röhr served as designers. On behalf of the contest organisers, the European Broadcasting Union (EBU), the event was overseen by Christine Marchal-Ortiz as scrutineer. The contest was presented by the journalist Kattis Ahlström and the television presenter Anders Lundin.

The graphic design, including the contest's logo, scoreboard, on-screen overlays and postcards, was developed by Stockholm Design Lab. The chosen logo, presented publicly in early 2000, was a pair of open lips, and described as "a sensual, yet stylistically pure, mouth representing song, dialogue and speech" by its designers; ahead of the 2004 contest this logo was also considered by contest organisers when developing the contest's new generic logo for that edition. The logo also featured prominently as part of the set design; the outline of the mouth featured on a display next to the stage and was filled with a distorted form of each country's national flag as its entry was performed. The 2000 contest was the first to incorporate LED display technology within the set design, with five LED pillars featuring on stage during each performance and displaying images designed to complement each song's theme or presentation and producing a unique backdrop to each performance.

A compilation album featuring all 24 competing entries was released within Europe ahead of the contest, through the German record labels Ariola and BMG. This was the first time an official album had been commissioned by the organisers and followed a previous attempt at an album for the 1999 contest which failed to contain all entries in that year's contest due to copyright issues.


Format


Entries

Each participating broadcaster was represented by one song, which was required to be no longer than three minutes in duration. A maximum of six performers were allowed on stage during each country's performance and all performers were required to be at least 16 years old in the year the contest was held. Selected entries were not permitted to be released commercially before 1 January 2000, and were then only allowed to be released in the country they represented until after the contest was held (except as part of a compilation album of all participating songs). The final submission date for all selected entries to be received by the contest organisers was set for 10 March. This submission was required to include a sound recording of the entry and backing track for use during the contest, a video presentation of the song on stage being performed by the artists, and the text of the song lyrics in its original language and translations in French and English for distribution to the participating broadcasters, their commentators and juries. Selected performers were required to be available from 7 May, with a staggered timetable for rehearsals in the contest venue to be developed by the organisers.

Following the confirmation of the 24 competing countries, the draw to determine the running order was held in Stockholm on 21 November 1999.


Voting procedure

The results of the 2000 contest were determined using the scoring system introduced in 1975: each country awarded twelve points to its favourite entry, followed by ten points to its second favourite, and then awarded points in decreasing value from eight to one for the remaining songs which featured in the country's top ten, with countries unable to vote for their own entry. Each participating broadcaster was required to use televoting to determine their points, with viewers able to register their vote by telephone for a total of five minutes following the performance of the last competing entry. Viewers could vote by calling one of twenty-three different telephone numbers to represent the twenty-four competing entries except that which represented their own country. Once phone lines were opened a video recap containing short clips of each competing entry with the accompanying phone number for voting was shown in order to aid viewers during the voting window, with each household able to vote a maximum of three times. Systems were also put in place to prevent lobby groups from one country voting for their entry by travelling to other countries.

Participating broadcasters which were unable to hold a televote in its country due to technological limitations could be granted an exception and their points would then be determined by a jury. Those conducting a televote were also required to assemble a jury, the votes of which could be used in case of a technical failure which prevented the televoting results from being rendered unusable. Each jury was composed of eight individuals, which was required to be split evenly between members of the public and music professionals, comprised additionally of an equal number of men and women, and below and above 30 years of age. Each jury member voted in secret and awarded between one and ten votes to each participating song, excluding that from their own country and with no abstentions permitted. The votes of each member were collected immediately following the country's performance and then tallied by the non-voting jury chairperson to determine the points to be awarded. In any cases where two or more songs received the same number of votes, a show of hands by all jury members was used to determine the final placing; if a tie still remained, the youngest jury member would have the deciding vote. All juries were based in their own countries and followed the contest through television, seeing the performances just as the public watching at home would. Juries watched not only the contest itself on 13 May 2000 but also the final dress rehearsal, which was held on the same day and produced under the exact same conditions as the actual contest. In order to maintain the integrity of the vote, reception of the contest to the juries was severed during the announcement of the results until after the points for their country had been announced; the points to be awarded from the last five countries in the voting order were also required to be sent ahead of time via fax to the contest organisers.


Postcards

Each entry was preceded by a video postcard which served as an introduction to that country, as well as providing an opportunity to showcase the running artistic theme of the event and to create a transition between entries to allow stage crew to make changes on stage. The postcards for the 2000 contest focussed on different aspects of life in Sweden; central to each country's postcard was a specific concept, e.g. an object or person, from that country which can be found in everyday Swedish life. The exception to this was the postcard for the Swedish entry, which showed a group of workers at Expo 2000 in Hannover, Germany. Listed below by order of performance are the locations featured in each postcard as well as the concept for the respective country represented:

Israel – Stockholm Public Library; a book by the Israeli author Amos Oz

Netherlands – Microbiology Centre, Karolinska Institute; Dutch scientists

United Kingdom – Råsunda Stadium; the British football manager Stuart Baxter

Estonia – Apartment in Stockholm; Estonian choral singing

France – Nightclub in Stockholm; French club music

Romania – Masquerade at the Royal Swedish Opera; a man dressed as Dracula

Malta – Stockholm harbour; the Maltese cross upon the sail of a boat

Norway – Stockholm City Centre; a man fills a boat with Norwegian petrol

Russia – Royal Dramatic Theatre; a performance of Anton Chekhov's Three Sisters

Belgium – Neighbourhood in Stockholm; a burglar is stopped by two chiens de Saint-Hubert

Cyprus – Underground station in Stockholm; two long-distance ice skaters eat Cypriot oranges

Iceland – Forest outside Stockholm; two campers are disturbed by two Icelandic horses

Spain – Moderna Museet; designed by the Spanish architect Rafael Moneo

Denmark – Apartment building in Stockholm; various apartments all have the same Danish lamp

Germany – Street in Stockholm; a street vendor holds a knackwurst as a police chase passes by

Switzerland – Eriksdalsbadet; a swimming race is timed using Swiss technology

Croatia – Stockholm from the air; a group of skydivers use parachutes, credited to the Croatian inventor Faust Vrančić

Sweden – Expo 2000, Hannover, Germany; construction workers watch the Eurovision Song Contest 2000

Macedonia – Cinema in Stockholm; showing of the Macedonian film Before the Rain

Finland – Stockholm Archipelago; a ferry from Finland

Latvia – Restaurant in Stockholm; pickled mushrooms, a Latvian speciality

Turkey – Internet office in Stockholm; Mahir Çağrı, a Turkish internet celebrity

Ireland – Dance studio in Stockholm; a group perform Irish dance

Austria – Stockholm Arlanda Airport; a man returns from an Austrian ski holiday with a noticeable sun tan


Contest overview

The contest was held on 13 May 2000 at 21:00 CEST and lasted 3 hours and 2 minutes. The table below outlines the participating countries, the order in which they performed, the competing artists and songs, and the results of the voting.

The show began with a video montage, comprising various scenes of contemporary Sweden overlaid with the shadow of a human mouth, representing the contest logo, reciting the names of the 24 participating countries in English in the order in which they would perform. The montage finished with a night-time aerial shot of the Globe Arena, followed by live transmission from inside the arena, where violinist Caroline Lundgren, dressed in traditional Swedish folk costume, exclaimed "Welcome Europe!" This was followed by a welcome from the presenters of the contest, Kattis Ahlström and Anders Lundin, in various languages of the participating countries. The interval act, "Once Upon a Time Europe Was Covered with Ice", mixed pre-recorded elements from various musicians and people from across Europe with live performances within the Globe Arena, and was composed and edited by Johan Söderberg and produced by John Nordling. The performance within the Globe Arena featured Lundgren on violin, the Strängnäs Drum Corps, street musicians and performers from Stockholm, and the Bounce Streetdance Company .

The winner was Denmark represented by the song "Fly on the Wings of Love", written by Jørgen Olsen and performed by the Olsen Brothers. This marked Denmark's second contest win, thirty-seven years after its first victory in 1963. Russia and Estonia achieved their best-ever results, finishing second and fourth respectively, while Latvia achieved one of the strongest ever début performances in the contest's history with a third-place finish. Denmark's win was considered by some to be a surprise, as the song was not among the pre-contest favourites of fans or bookmakers, both of which had highly tipped Estonia for the win; however the Danish song ultimately received the third-highest points total yet seen at Eurovision and would go on to success across European charts in the weeks following the contest. Following the contest, the Russian delegation petitioned for Denmark to be disqualified due to the use of a vocoder during a brief moment of the performance to add an electronic sound to the vocals; the petition was ultimately rejected by the EBU.

The Israeli entry, "Sameach" by the group PingPong, caused some controversy in the lead-up to the contest. The music video for the song, released the month before the contest, featured same-sex kissing amongst the band members, singing into cucumbers, and other suggestive scenes with phallic imagery, which caused consternation with Israeli religious leaders and right-wing groups. The performance of the song, about an Israeli woman having a love affair with a man from Damascus, also saw the group waving both Israeli and Syrian flags in a call for peace between the two nations. However the participating Israeli broadcaster IBA raised objections during rehearsals, and subsequently disavowed its entry from the contest after the group refused to remove the Syrian flags from their performance; although the broadcaster did not prevent the group from performing in the contest, it was reported that the broadcaster had pulled funding for the group entirely.


Spokespersons

Each participating broadcaster appointed a spokesperson who was responsible for announcing, in English or French, the votes for its respective country. As had been the case since the 1994 contest, the spokespersons were connected via satellite and appeared in vision during the broadcast; spokespersons at the 2000 contest are listed below.


Detailed voting results

All countries were expected to use televoting to determine the points awarded by all countries, unless technological limitations in a country prevented a televote being held to a high standard, or where exceptional circumstances prevented a televote from being held. Jury voting was used in Russia due to an underdeveloped telephone system in the country, as well as in Macedonia, Romania and Turkey. The Netherlands and Latvia had originally planned to use televoting to determine their points, however the votes of their back-up juries were used instead. In the Netherlands, due to the Enschede fireworks disaster the broadcast of the contest was suspended partway through and thus a televote could not be held, while in Latvia televoting lines were overloaded resulting in viewers unable to vote and leaving organisers unable to accurately determine a valid result.

The announcement of the results from each country was conducted in the order in which they performed, with the spokespersons announcing their country's points in English or French in ascending order. The detailed breakdown of the points awarded by each country is listed in the tables below.


12 points

The below table summarises how the maximum 12 points were awarded from one country to another. The winning country is shown in bold. Denmark received the maximum score of 12 points from eight countries, with Latvia and Russia receiving four sets of 12 points each, Germany receiving three sets, Turkey receiving two, and Iceland, Romania and Sweden each receiving one maximum score.


Broadcasts

Each participating broadcaster was required to relay live and in full the contest via television. Non-participating EBU member broadcasters were also able to relay the contest as "passive participants"; any passive countries wishing to participate in the following year's event were also required to provide a live broadcast of the contest or a deferred broadcast within 24 hours. Broadcasters were able to send commentators to provide coverage of the contest in their own native language and to relay information about the artists and songs to their viewers. These commentators were typically sent to the venue to report on the event, and were able to provide commentary from small booths constructed at the back of the venue.

In addition to the broadcasts by EBU members, the contest was also available on the internet for the first time in its history. Sponsored by Microsoft, a webcast of the contest was available on 18 European MSN sites as well as in the United States, Canada and Australia.

Known details on the broadcasts in each country, including the specific broadcasting stations and commentators, are shown in the tables below.


Other awards

The Barbara Dex Award, created in 1997 by fansite House of Eurovision, was awarded to the performer deemed to have been the "worst dressed" among the participants. The winner in 2000 was Belgium's representative Nathalie Sorce , as determined by visitors to the House of Eurovision website.