Eurovision Dance Contest 2007




Location

Alongside the announcement as host broadcaster, the host city, venue and presenters for the contest were announced by the British Broadcasting Corporation (BBC) on 13 April 2007.

The host venue was the BBC Television Centre, White City, London, which opened in 1960. It is one of the most readily recognisable facilities of its type having appeared as the backdrop for many BBC programmes. It remained to be one of the largest such facilities in the world until it closed in March 2013. In September 2017, BBC Studioworks re-opened the three studios at Television Centre, alongside a range of post-production facilities and ancillary areas.

Television Centre previously hosted the Eurovision Song Contest 1963 after France, which won the year before, declined to host it due to financial shortcomings, also having hosted the competition in 1959 and 1961. The last time the United Kingdom hosted one of the Eurovision's network Family of Events was the Eurovision Young Dancers 2001, which was also held in London.


Format


Host broadcaster

The contest was hosted by the BBC, and was a co-production by Splash Media – run by the developers of its successful Strictly Come Dancing format – and sports production house Sunset + Vine – with help from the International DanceSport Federation and in association with the European Broadcasting Union (EBU).

The contest was presented in English and French languages, although France did not take part. Each broadcaster also had the option of providing its own commentators at the event.


Visual design

The logo of 2007 contest features the word Eurovision written in the same way as it is on the Eurovision Song Contest logos without the heart but included the silhouette of a dancing couple in front of a star that contains the flag of the host country, the United Kingdom.


Running order

The running order for the sixteen participants was announced on 6 August 2007 and had been determined in two steps. In the first round, the participating countries were drawn into groups, under supervision of an auditor. In the second round, the producers of the contest determined the final running order within the drawn groups to assure variety in the live show.


Interval act

Singer Enrique Iglesias performed a medley of "Tired of Being Sorry" and "Do You Know? (The Ping Pong Song)" as the interval act. The performance was pre-recorded before the live show.


Participants

On 18 January 2007, the EBU officially announced the creation of this new dance contest. At the time, fourteen broadcasters had already expressed their interest in taking part, with a production meeting taking place the day before in London. On 13 April, BBC News Online incorrectly reported that the broadcasters from thirteen countries would compete in the upcoming inaugural contest that autumn; these being Austria, Denmark, Finland, Germany, Ireland, Netherlands, Portugal, Russia, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, Ukraine, and United Kingdom. Greece, Lithuania, and Poland were not included in the list despite being confirmed as participants. The Croatian broadcaster HRT was one of the fourteen broadcasters that had initially expressed an interest in taking part (alongside Ukraine), but pulled out due to costs and scheduling problems.

On 29 August 2007, a press conference was held with the participation of the competition producers, the show presenters, and all the competing couples. On the same day, the participants attended the opening reception, which was organised at City Hall, London. Camera dress rehearsals followed over the next few days.

Due to the forest fires in Greece, the Greek broadcaster ERT did not air the show live and therefore used a back-up jury instead of televoting.

Austria and Portugal both finished with the same number of points, however, Austria received points from every other participating nation thus receiving points from more countries than Portugal, hence Austria took 5th place.


Scoreboard

Finland win first ever Eurovision Dance Contest 2007 held in London

The following 16 countries took part, and received the scores shown below.


12 points

Below is a summary of all 12 points in the contest:


Spokespersons

The order in which each country announced their votes was done in alphabetical order of each countries. The spokespersons are shown alongside each country.

Lithuania – Lavija Šurnaitė-Kairienė

Netherlands – Marcus van Teijlingen


Broadcasts

Most broadcaters sent commentators to London or commentated from their own country, in order to add insight to the participants and, if necessary, provide voting information. In addition to the participating countries, the event was also broadcast in Albania, Armenia, Belarus, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Cyprus, Iceland, Israel, and Macedonia.


Viewing figures