Eurovision Song Contest 2008




Location

Radio Television of Serbia (RTS) gained the right to host the contest after "Molitva" performed by Marija Šerifović won the 2007 contest in Helsinki, Finland. On 15 May 2007, one day following the final of the 2007 contest, RTS reported that it would host the 2008 contest in Belgrade. The broadcaster chose the Belgrade Arena in Belgrade as the venue for the contest, one of the largest indoor arenas in Europe, with a total capacity of 25,000 seats.

On 14 September 2007, the Mayor of Helsinki handed over the "Eurovision keys" to the Deputy of Belgrade. This ceremony was meant to be a tradition from the 2008 contest and onward, and the ring contains a key from every city that has ever hosted the competition. This tradition continued until 2024.


Potential change of location

Following the unilateral Kosovo declaration of independence from Serbia on 17 February 2008, which has resulted in protests and unrest across the country, the host of the event was considered to be changed. The National Television Company of Ukraine (NTU) was considered an option since they came second in 2007. Yleisradio (YLE) were another option, as they hosted the previous year's competition in Helsinki, Finland. Greece's Ellinikí Radiofonía Tileórasi (ERT) also offered the European Broadcasting Union (EBU) to host the contest in Athens, Greece again. It was later decided that the contest would stay in Belgrade, with the EBU giving support. RTS would gain a guarantee of safety and security from the government of Serbia for all visitors and participants. The delegations of Albania, Croatia, and Israel had special security. In the end, the contest was held without any incidents.


Participants

Eligibility for potential participation in the Eurovision Song Contest requires a national broadcaster with active EBU membership capable of receiving the contest via the Eurovision network and broadcasting it live nationwide. The EBU issued an invitation to participate in the contest to all active members.

On 21 December 2007, the EBU confirmed that 43 countries would be present in Belgrade. San Marino, as well as the newest EBU member, Azerbaijan, made its debut at the 2008 contest. Austria did not compete; its broadcaster, Österreichischer Rundfunk (ORF), said "we've already seen in 2007 that it's not the quality of the song, but the country of origin that determines the decision."

Automatic grand finalists Germany and Spain exercised voting rights at the first semi-final. France, the United Kingdom and Serbia exercised voting rights at the second semi-final. Spain and France each broadcast only the semi-final in which they participated; Germany, Serbia, and the United Kingdom screened both semi-finals (with Germany broadcasting on a delay).

Several of the performing artists had previously competed as lead artists representing the same country in past editions: Charlotte Perrelli had won the contest for Sweden in 1999; Dima Bilan had represented Russia in 2006; and Roberto Meloni, a member of Pirates of the Sea, had represented Latvia in 2007 as part of Bonaparti.lv. In addition, Gisela representing Andorra, had provided backing vocals for Spain in 2002.


Other countries

EBU member broadcasters in Austria, Monaco, Slovakia, and Tunisia confirmed non-participation prior to the announcement of the participants list by the EBU.


Production


Presenters

On 4 March 2008, RTS revealed that Jovana Janković and Željko Joksimović would be the presenters of the contest. Janković served as an anchor of the RTS morning show and hosted the allocation draw ceremony held earlier that year, while Joksimović represented Serbia and Montenegro in 2004 and hosted the allocation draw with Janković in January.


Visual design

RTS ran a competition that led to the creation of the 2008 contest's branding, logo and the stage. On 1 October 2007, the logo titled "Mama 2008" was announced as the winner among 455 submissions. The stage design, titled "Confluence" was also declared as the winner among 70 submissions. However, due to the negative responses to the design, the logo was subsequently changed, and the new logo was presented in January 2008. The stage design was also eventually changed.

The theme of the contest was based around the "confluence of sound". This was symbolic as Belgrade lies on the confluence of two European rivers, the Sava and Danube. The replacement logo, a treble clef, formed the graphical basis of the design created by Boris Miljković.

The postcards in the first and second semi-final were based around the creation of the flag of the nation that was to perform next. Each post card had a short story related to each country and its people. During each postcard a short letter was displayed. All were in the national language of the artist's country, with the exception of the Serbian postcard, which consisted of "Welcome to Belgrade" and "Welcome to Serbia" in various languages. The postcards were brought to an end by a stamp with this year's Eurovision logo.

According to RTS the stage represented native identities, history and modern themes, symbols and universally recognised messages. The confluence-themed stage also contained a large number of television and LCD screens. The stage had settings for all new electronic possibilities including some movable parts of the stage. It was designed by Chicago-based David Cushing.

The first semi-final was created around a city theme. The contest opened with a panorama of the city of Belgrade forming in the stage's background with two waves sliding down the stage to meet in the centre – at the confluence, the overall theme of the contest.

The second semi-final was based around the theme of water, which was enhanced by the look of the stage during the interval act where the water formed the main colours of the stage.

The grand final was based on the theme of the confluence. Construction of the stage lasted several days and was carried out by various teams from across Europe. Pyrotechnics were heavily used for the entries from Armenia, Azerbaijan, Finland, Germany, Turkey, the Czech Republic, Bulgaria, and Switzerland. The stage received positive feedback from the media and fans describing it as "one of the best looking stages in the history of the competition".


Format


Expansion to two semi-finals

At a press conference in Helsinki in May 2007, Svante Stockselius, executive supervisor of the contest for the EBU, announced that the competition's format may be expanded to two semi-finals in 2008 or 2009. On 28 September 2007 it was announced that the EBU had approved the plan of hosting two semi-finals in 2008.

According to Stockselius, there were multiple ideas on how the two semi-finals would be organized, such as prerecording both semi-finals and airing them simultaneously on Thursday 22 May, with each broadcaster airing the semi-final their country competes or votes in; or prerecording one semi-final, while the other one is held live, and airing them simultaneously on Thursday 22 May, with each broadcaster airing the semi-final their country votes in. In both cases, the results sequences would be held live.

Although originally this option was not being considered due to the additional costs to such a production, it was later decided that the two semi-finals would be held on different days, both live, on Tuesday 20 May and 22 May 2008.


Semi-final allocation draw

Based on research conducted by the EBU's tele-voting partner Digame, the semi-finalists were sorted into the two heats through the drawing of lots, which was seeded to keep countries that have a significant history of voting for each other apart. Each broadcaster had to broadcast the semi-final in which they took part, with the broadcasting of the other semi-final being optional. The draw for the semi-final allocation occurred in the City Assembly of Belgrade on Monday 28 January 2008 at 13:00 CET and was conducted by the hosts of the contest Jovana Janković and Željko Joksimović.

First, two envelopes with 'Semi-Final 1' and 'Semi-Final 2' were drawn. Then, three countries from each pot were chosen randomly to take part in the first semi-final and the other three in the second one. The country left in Pot 5 took part in the first envelope that is drawn. While, the country left in Pot 6 in the second one.

The automatic grand finalist countries chose whether they would broadcast both semi-finals or just one, but viewers from these countries could only vote in one. From the draw conducted, it was decided which of the five grand finalist countries would broadcast and have voting rights in either of the events. The semi-finals were webcast live through Eurovision.tv. The top nine songs from the televoting qualified for the grand final, and a tenth was determined by the back-up juries. Twenty-five songs competed in the grand final.

On 24 January 2008, all 38 countries in the semi-finals were separated into the following pots based on voting history and geographical location:


Running order

The draw to decide the running order of the songs in each semi-final and the grand final was conducted at the Heads of Delegation meeting on 17 March 2008.


Contest overview


Semi-final 1

The first semi-final was held on 20 May 2008 at 21:00 (CEST). All the countries competing in this semi-final were eligible to vote, plus Germany and Spain. The highlighted countries qualified for the final.

Azerbaijan, Greece and Russia were drawn to decide their own running order positions, while the rest were decided randomly.


Semi-final 2

The second semi-final was held on 22 May 2008 at 21:00 (CEST). All the countries competing in this semi-final were eligible to vote, plus United Kingdom, France and Serbia. The highlighted countries qualified for the final.

Macedonia, Portugal and Denmark were drawn to decide their own running order positions, while the rest were decided randomly.


Final

The grand finalists were:

the "Big Four" countries (France, Germany, Spain, and the United Kingdom);

the top nine countries from the first semi-final plus one wildcard from the juries;

the top nine countries from the second semi-final plus one wildcard from the juries.

The grand final was held on 24 May 2008 at 21:00 (CEST) and was won by Russia. 25 countries participated in the final and all 43 participants voted.

Serbia was drawn to decide its own running order position, while the rest were decided randomly.

Russia won with 272 points. Ukraine came second with 230 points, with Greece, Armenia, Norway, Serbia, Turkey, Azerbaijan, Israel and Bosnia and Herzegovina completing the top ten. Croatia, Finland, Germany, Poland and United Kingdom occupied the bottom five positions.

Each participating broadcaster appointed a spokesperson who was responsible for announcing the votes for its respective country. The voting order and spokespersons during the grand final were as follows:

Bosnia and Herzegovina – Melina Garibović


Detailed voting results


Semi-final 1

Below is a summary of all 12 points in the first semi-final:


Semi-final 2

Below is a summary of all 12 points in the second semi-final:


Final

Below is a summary of all 12 points in the grand final:


Broadcasts

Most countries sent commentators to Belgrade or commentated from their own country, in order to add insight to the participants and, if necessary, provide voting information.


High-definition broadcasts

RTS broadcast the event in 1080i high-definition (HD) and 5.1 surround sound. The new high-definition television system was in place at the Belgrade Arena by April 2008. This is the second year that the event was broadcast live in HD. BBC HD broadcast the contest in High Definition in the United Kingdom. Swedish broadcaster SVT broadcast both the semi-final and the grand final on SVT HD. Lithuanian broadcaster LRT broadcast both the semi-final and the grand final in 1080i high-definition (HD) on their channel LTV. The same occurred on Swiss HD channel HD suisse; on this channel viewers were able to choose the language of the commentary while viewing a semi-final or grand final of the Eurovision Song Contest. However, all other countries broadcast the show only in standard definition, and the event will only be available to buy on a standard-definition DVD; it will not be released on HD-DVD or Blu-ray.


International broadcasts

Australia – Although Australia was not eligible to enter, the contest was broadcast on SBS. The first semi-final was broadcast on Friday 23 May at 19:30 local time, with the second semi-final on Saturday 24 May 2008 at 19:30 local time, and the Final on Sunday 25 May 2008 at 19:30 local time, amongst a weekend of Eurovision-themed programming. SBS local host Julia Zemiro provided introductory and concluding segments with SBS otherwise broadcasting the BBC's coverage and commentary. In recent years the contest has been one of SBS's highest-rating programmes in terms of viewer numbers. The grand final rated well for SBS with 427,000 viewers tuning in for the grand final with 421,000 for the second semi-final and 272,000 for the first semi-final.

Austria – In Austria, ORF broadcast the contest live and received high TV ratings. However, it did not broadcast the semi-finals on 20 and 22 May.

Gibraltar – Gibraltar screened only the final on GBC.

A live broadcast of the Eurovision Song Contest was available worldwide via satellite through European streams such as TVRi, ERT World, ARMTV, TVE Internacional, TRT International, TVP Polonia, RTP Internacional, RTS Sat and SVT Europa. The official Eurovision Song Contest website also provided a live stream without commentary via the peer-to-peer medium Octoshape.


Viewership

A total of 108.2 million people watched the 3 shows, and 64 million watched the final alone.

The final of the contest became the most watched broadcast in Serbia ever, with 3,350,000 people watching.


Other awards

In addition to the main winner's trophy, the Marcel Bezençon Awards and the Barbara Dex Award were contested during the 2008 Eurovision Song Contest. The OGAE, "General Organisation of Eurovision Fans" voting poll also took place before the contest.


Marcel Bezençon Awards

The Marcel Bezençon Awards, organised since 2002 by Sweden's then-Head of Delegation and 1992 representative Christer Björkman, and 1984 winner Richard Herrey, honours songs in the contest's final. For the only time, the awards were divided into four categories: Artistic Award which was voted by previous winners of the contest, Composers Award, Poplight Fan Award which was voted by fans on the Swedish website poplight.se, and Press Award.


OGAE

OGAE, an organisation of over forty Eurovision Song Contest fan clubs across Europe and beyond, conducts an annual voting poll first held in 2002 as the Marcel Bezençon Fan Award. After all votes were cast, the top-ranked entry in the 2008 poll was Sweden's "Hero" performed by Charlotte Perrelli; the top five results are shown below.


Barbara Dex Award

The Barbara Dex Award is a humorous fan award given to the worst dressed artist each year. Named after Belgium's representative who came last in the 1993 contest, wearing her self-designed dress, the award was handed by the fansite House of Eurovision from 1997 to 2016 and is being carried out by the fansite songfestival.be since 2017.


Official album

Eurovision Song Contest: Belgrade 2008 was the official compilation album of the 2008 contest, put together by the European Broadcasting Union and released by EMI Records and CMC International on 12 May 2008.The album featured all 43 songs that entered in the 2008 contest, including the semi-finalists that failed to qualify into the grand final.


Charts