Eurovision Song Contest 1967




Location

Österreichischer Rundfunk (ORF) staged the 1967 contest in Vienna, after winning the 1966 contest for Austria with the song "Merci, Chérie" by Udo Jürgens. The venue selected was the Festival Hall of the Hofburg Palace. With its 1,000 m2 (11,000 sq ft) of floor space, the Festival Hall is the largest room in the entire palace complex and was originally built as a throne room, but was never used as such. The Hofburg Palace was the principal winter residence of the Habsburg dynasty, rulers of the Austro-Hungarian empire, and it currently serves as the official residence of the President of Austria.


Participants

Broadcasters from seventeen countries participated in the 1967 contest. Of the eighteen countries that participated in 1966 only Denmark was absent. Danmarks Radio (DR) chose not to participate this year and left the contest at this point, not to be returning again until 1978. The reason was that the new director of the television entertainment department thought that the money could be spent in a better way.

The contest featured three representatives who had previously performed as lead artists for the same country. Claudio Villa had represented Italy in 1962, Kirsti Sparboe had represented Norway in 1965, and Raphael had represented Spain in 1966.

Despite being a popular winning song for the United Kingdom, singer Sandie Shaw intensely disliked the composition, though her attitude towards the song somewhat mellowed in later years, even releasing a new version in 2007.

The entry from Luxembourg, "L'amour est bleu", sung by Vicky Leandros, came in fourth; nonetheless, it went on to become one of the biggest hits of the 1967 contest, and a year later would be a big instrumental hit for French musician, Paul Mauriat, under the English title, "Love Is Blue". Portugal was represented by Eduardo Nascimento, who was the first black male singer in the history of the contest. After winning the Sanremo Music Festival 1967, Italian participant Claudio Villa was due to perform the song "Non pensare a me", but it was disqualified due to being commercially released before the deadline set by the EBU, and was replaced with "Non andare più lontano".


Format

Following the confirmation of the seventeen competing countries, the draw to determine the running order of the contest was held on 21 March 1967.

The stage setup was a little unusual this year. There was a staircase in the middle of the stage as well as two revolving mirrored walls on both ends of the stage; they began revolving at the start of each song, and stopped at its end. A change in rule also required half of every nation's jury to be less than 30 years old.

The presenter Erica Vaal became confused whilst the voting was taking place, and declared the United Kingdom's entry to be the winner before the last country, Ireland, had announced its votes. She also ended the programme by congratulating the winning song and country, and saying "goodbye" in several different languages.


Contest overview

The contest took place on 8 April 1967, beginning at 22:00 CET.


Spokespersons

Each participating broadcaster appointed a spokesperson who was responsible for announcing the votes for its respective country via telephone. Known spokespersons at the 1967 contest are listed below.


Detailed voting results

Every participating broadcaster assembled a jury panel of ten people. Every jury member could give one vote to his or her favourite song, except that representing their own country. This means that any song could receive a maximum of 10 votes from a national jury, but none achieved this. The highest number of votes a song received from a jury was seven, received by the song from the United Kingdom three times (from the juries of Norway, Switzerland, and France). The Portuguese jury gave eight songs only one vote, and one song (the Spanish one) two votes.

The voting sequence was one of the more chaotic in Eurovision history; the students from the University of Vienna who were operating the scoreboard made several errors during the telecast, which were corrected by the scrutineer. Hostess Erica Vaal also began to announce the winner before realising she had excluded the last jury to vote, the Irish jury.


Broadcasts

Each participating broadcaster was required to relay the contest via its networks. Non-participating EBU member broadcasters were also able to relay the contest as "passive participants". Broadcasters were able to send commentators to provide coverage of the contest in their own native language and to relay information about the artists and songs to their television viewers. Reports estimated the global viewership to be 150 to 350 million viewers.

Known details on the broadcasts in each country, including the specific broadcasting stations and commentators are shown in the tables below. In addition to the participating countries, the contest was also reportedly broadcast in Czechoslovakia, East Germany, Poland and the Soviet Union via Intervision.