Eurovision Song Contest 1970




Location

Due to there being four winners in the previous contest –France, the Netherlands, Spain, and the United Kingdom–, a question was raised as to which broadcaster would host the 1970 contest. With Televisión Española (TVE) having hosted the 1969 contest in Madrid and the British Broadcasting Corporation (BBC) the 1968 contest in London, only Office de Radiodiffusion Télévision Française (ORTF) and Nederlandse Omroep Stichting (NOS) were in consideration. A draw of ballots between these two resulted in NOS being chosen as the host broadcaster.

The Congrescentrum, venue of the 1970 contest, is a semi-permanent exhibit at the Ferdinand Bolstraat in Amsterdam. It was originally opened on 31 October 1922. This building was later replaced by the current RAI building - a congress and event center - on Europe Square, designed by Alexander Bodon, and opened on 2 February 1961.


Participants

Austria (which had not taken part in 1969), Finland, Norway, Portugal, and Sweden boycotted this contest as they were not pleased with the result of 1969 and the voting structure.

For the first time, no lead artists from previous contests returned. However, María Jesús Aguirre and Mercedes Valimaña, members of Trío La La La , who provided backing vocals for Spain in 1968, returned as backing singers for Spain.


Format

Following the confirmation of the twelve competing countries, the draw to determine the running order of the contest was held on 15 January 1970.

The Dutch producers were forced to pad out the show as only 12 nations decided to make the trip to Amsterdam. The result was a format that has endured almost to the present day. An extended opening sequence (filmed in Amsterdam) set the scene, while every entry was introduced by a short video 'postcard' featuring each of the participating artists, ostensibly in their own nation. However, the 'postcards' for Switzerland, Luxembourg, and Monaco were all filmed on location in Paris (as was the French postcard). The long introduction film (over four minutes long) was followed by what probably is one of the shortest ever introductions by any presenter. Willy Dobbe only welcomed the viewers in English, French, and Dutch, finishing her introduction after only 24 seconds. On-screen captions introduced each entry, with the song titles listed all in lowercase and the names of the artist and composers/authors all in capitals.

The set design was devised by Roland de Groot; a simple design was composed of a number of curved horizontal bars and silver baubles which could be moved in a variety of different ways.

To avoid an incident like in 1969, a tie-breaking rule was created. It stated that, if two or more songs gained the same number of votes and were tied for first place, each song would have to be performed again. After which each national jury (other than the juries of the countries concerned) would have a show of hands of which they thought was the best. If the countries tied again, then they would share first place.


Contest overview

Ireland won the contest with "All Kinds of Everything", penned by Derry Lindsay and Jackie Smith, and sung by another unknown, Dana, an 18-year-old schoolgirl from Derry, Northern Ireland. As the contest was held in the Netherlands this year, and the country was one of the four winners in 1969, Dana received her awards from the Dutch winner Lenny Kuhr.


Spokespersons

Each participating broadcaster appointed a spokesperson who was responsible for announcing the votes for their respective country via telephone. Known spokespersons at the 1970 contest are listed below.


Detailed voting results


Broadcasts

Each participating broadcaster was required to relay the contest via its networks. Non-participating EBU member broadcasters were also able to relay the contest as "passive participants". Broadcasters were able to send commentators to provide coverage of the contest in their own native language and to relay information about the artists and songs to their television viewers.

In addition to the participating countries, the contest was reported to have been broadcast by EBU member broadcasters in Greece, Iceland, Israel, and Tunisia; in Bulgaria, Czechoslovakia, Hungary, Poland, Romania, and the Soviet Union via Intervision; and in Argentina, Brazil, and Chile. An estimated global audience of 400 million viewers was reported to have watched the contest. It was also known to broadcast on radio in countries including Ireland, Germany, Spain, and the United Kingdom. Known details on the broadcasts in each country, including the specific broadcasting stations and commentators are shown in the tables below.