Eurovision Song Contest 2007




Location

Helsinki, the Finnish capital, was chosen as the host city, although other cities were in the running; the second-largest city of Espoo, the third-largest city of Tampere, and the city of Turku all submitted bids to host the contest alongside Kittilä, Lahti, and Rovaniemi. The choice of Helsinki was justified, among other things, by the requirements of the number of people and technology, as well as its superior flight and transport connections and accommodation capacity.


Venue

A total of 11 venues in seven locations applied for hosting rights. The known possible venues for the contest included LänsiAuto Areena in Espoo, Helsinki Ice Hall, Helsinki Fair Center, industrial workshop buildings at Pasilan konepaja in Helsinki, Lahden suurhalli in Lahti, Rovaniemi Lapland Arena, Pirkkahalli (main hall of Tampere Exhibition and Sports Centre), Tampere Ice Stadium and Turkuhalli.

In the end, Helsinki was chosen, with the host venue being the Hartwall Areena. The venue is a large multi-functional indoor arena, which opened in 1997, and can take some 12,000–15,000 spectators for concerts. Its name comes from its largest sponsor, the beverage company Hartwall, also based in Helsinki. For the contest, the arena was referred to as the Helsinki Arena.


Format

On 12 March 2007, the draws for the running order for the semi-final, final and voting procedure took place. A new feature allowed five wild-card countries from the semi-final and three countries from the final to choose their starting position. The heads of delegation went on stage and chose the number they would take. In the semi-final, Austria, Andorra, Turkey, Slovenia, and Latvia were able to choose their positions. In the final, Armenia, Ukraine, and Germany were able to exercise this privilege. All countries opted for spots in the second half of both evenings. Shortly after the draw, the entries were approved by the European Broadcasting Union (EBU). The United Kingdom chose its entry after the deadline because they were granted special dispensation from the EBU.

The contest saw some minor changes to the voting time-frame. The recap, a compilation summary video of all entries including phone numbers, was shown twice. The voting process was the same as 2006 except there was fifteen minutes to vote, an increase of five minutes on the 2006 contest. In the final, the results from each country were once again shown from one to seven points automatically on screen and only eight, ten and twelve were read by the spokespeople. For the first time, the winner was awarded a promotion tour around Europe, visiting Denmark, Spain, Sweden, the Netherlands, Greece, and Germany. The tour was held between 16 May and 21 May. The event was sponsored by Nordic communications group TeliaSonera, and — as with several previous contests — Nobel Biocare. Apocalyptica were the interval act, and played a medley of songs: Worlds Collide, Faraway and finally Life Burns!, but without the usual lyrics.


Visual design

The official logo of the contest remained the same as 2006; the flag in the centre of the heart was changed to the Finnish flag. The EBU and Yle announced that the theme for the 2007 contest would be "True Fantasy", which embraced Finland and "Finnishness" in terms of the polarities associated with the country. The design agency Dog Design was responsible for the design of the visual theme of the contest which incorporated vibrant kaleidoscopic patterns formed from various symbols including exclamation marks and the letter F. The stage was in the shape of a kantele, a traditional Finnish instrument. On 20 February 2007 a reworked official website for the contest was launched marking the first public exhibition of this year's theme.

The shows were produced and broadcast in high-definition for the first time, following tests at the previous edition.

An official CD and DVD as well as an official fan book were released. The themes of the postcards (short videos between the acts) were short stories occurring in different Finnish landmarks.


Participants

Participating broadcasters in a Eurovision Song Contest must be active members of the EBU. The broadcasters from 42 countries submitted preliminary applications. Although in previous years the maximum number of participating countries was 40, the EBU allowed all 42 to participate in 2007. The Czech Republic, Serbia, Montenegro, and Georgia all entered the contest for the first time in 2007. Monaco announced its non-participation on 12 December 2006, and the EBU announced the final lineup of 42 countries on 15 December 2006.

Several of the performing artists had previously represented the same country in past editions: Evridiki had represented Cyprus in 1992 and in 1994, and provided backing vocals in 1983 and in 1987; Karolina had represented Macedonia in 2002; and Edsilia Rombley had represented the Netherlands in 1998. In addition Eiríkur Hauksson representing Iceland, had represented Iceland in 1986 as member of ICY and Norway in 1991 as part of Just 4 Fun.


Contest overview


Semi-final

The semi-final was held on 10 May 2007 at 22:00 EEST (21:00 CEST). 28 countries performed and all 42 participants voted. The highlighted countries qualified for the final.


Final

The finalists were:

the four automatic qualifiers France, Germany, Spain, and the United Kingdom;

the top 10 countries from the 2006 final (other than the automatic qualifiers);

the top 10 countries from the 2007 semi-final.

The final was held on 12 May 2007 at 22:00 EEST (21:00 CEST). and was won by Serbia. 24 countries performed and all 42 participants voted.

Serbia won with 268 points. Ukraine came second with 235 points, with Russia, Turkey, Bulgaria, Belarus, Greece, Armenia, Hungary and Moldova completing the top ten. Spain, Lithuania, France, United Kingdom and Ireland occupied the bottom five positions.

Each participating broadcaster appointed a spokesperson responsible for announcing the votes for its respective country. The order in which they announced their votes was determined in a draw during the heads of delegation meeting. The spokespersons appeared in the final in the following order:

Bosnia and Herzegovina – Vesna Andree Zaimović

Netherlands – Paul de Leeuw and Edsilia Rombley

Iceland – Ragnhildur Steinunn Jónsdóttir


Detailed voting results

All countries participating in the contest were required to use televoting and/or SMS voting during both evenings of the contest. In the event of technical difficulties, or if the votes of the country did not meet the EBU threshold, a back-up jury's results were to be used. Albania and Andorra were the only countries that used their juries.


Semi-final

Below is a summary of all 12 points in the semi-final:


Final

Below is a summary of all 12 points in the final:


Broadcasts

The official Eurovision Song Contest website also provided a live stream without commentary, using the peer-to-peer transport Octoshape.


International broadcasts

Australia – Although Australia was not itself eligible to enter, the semi-final and final were broadcast on SBS and, as per previous years, featured commentary relayed from the BBC. As was the case each year, they were not broadcast live due to the difference in Australian time zones. The final rated an estimated 436,000 viewers, and was ranked number 20 on the broadcasters top rating programs of the 2006/2007 financial year.

Azerbaijan – AzTV had announced its interest in entering the contest; however, after it was denied active EBU membership on 18 June 2007, it was left unable to participate. Another Azerbaijani broadcaster, İctimai Television, broadcast the contest. It was a preliminary EBU member at the time, and had broadcast it for the previous two years. It was the only non-participating broadcaster this year to send its own commentators to the contest.


High-definition broadcast

Yle produced the event in 1080i HD and 5.1 surround sound. This was the first year that the event was broadcast live in HD. The British broadcaster BBC broadcast the final in high definition on BBC HD. Swedish broadcaster SVT broadcast both the semi-final and the final on SVT HD. However, the event was available on DVD in standard-definition only, with no DVD or Blu-ray version available in high-definition.


Other awards

In addition to the main winner's trophy, the Marcel Bezençon Awards and the Barbara Dex Award were contested during the 2007 Eurovision Song Contest. The OGAE, "General Organisation of Eurovision Fans" voting poll also took place before the contest.


Marcel Bezençon Awards

The Marcel Bezençon Awards, organised since 2002 by Sweden's then-Head of Delegation and 1992 representative Christer Björkman, and 1984 winner Richard Herrey, honours songs in the contest's final. The awards are divided into three categories: Artistic Award which was voted by previous winners of the contest, Composers Award, and Press Award.


OGAE

OGAE, an organisation of over forty Eurovision Song Contest fan clubs across Europe and beyond, conducts an annual voting poll first held in 2002 as the Marcel Bezençon Fan Award. After all votes were cast, the top-ranked entry in the 2007 poll was also the winner of the contest, Serbia's "Molitva" performed by Marija Šerifović; the top five results are shown below.


Barbara Dex Award

The Barbara Dex Award is a humorous fan award given to the worst dressed artist each year. Named after Barbara Dex who came last for Belgium in 1993, wearing her self-designed dress, the award was handed by the fansite House of Eurovision from 1997 to 2016 and is being carried out by the fansite songfestival.be since 2017.


Official album

Eurovision Song Contest: Helsinki 2007 was the official compilation album of the 2007 contest, put together by the European Broadcasting Union and released by CMC International on 20 April 2007. The album featured all 42 songs that entered in the 2007 contest, including the semi-finalists that failed to qualify into the grand final.


Charts