Eurovision Song Contest Asia




Development

In September 2008, the European Broadcasting Union (EBU) announced that an Asian-Pacific counterpart to the Eurovision Song Contest would be held in 2009. Dubbed Our Sound – The Asia Pacific Song Contest by 4 March 2009, it was set to be held in the second half of the year, and was to be coordinated by the Singaporean company Asiavision, led by German entrepreneur Andreas Gerlach. Broadcasters from sixteen countries and regions were slated to compete, namely Cambodia, China, Hong Kong, India, Indonesia, Japan, Laos, Macao, Malaysia, Pakistan, Philippines, Singapore, South Korea, Taiwan, Thailand, and Vietnam. The contest was delayed multiple times and never materialised.

In March 2016, the EBU began development on an adaptation of the Eurovision Song Contest for the region with Special Broadcasting Service (SBS). SBS was working on the project with its production partner Blink TV. The first contest was scheduled to be held in Australia in 2017. The official name of the competition was revealed to be Eurovision Asia Song Contest (or simply Eurovision Asia) in August 2017. By May, Australia, Hong Kong and Singapore had shown interest in hosting the first edition of the contest. The Singaporean government put forward S$4 million to host the event, while the city of Sydney and the state of New South Wales said they would invest in hosting. The city council of Gold Coast claimed in November 2018 that the first contest would take place at the Gold Coast Convention and Exhibition Centre from 30 November to 7 December 2019. In May 2021, it was confirmed that SBS had shelved the project.

SBS's plans from May 2016 were for one broadcaster from each country in the Asia-Pacific region to be eligible to compete, meaning there would be a maximum of 68 participants. Membership in the Asia-Pacific Broadcasting Union (ABU) would not be a requirement for participation. By March 2019, the broadcasters from ten countries had confirmed their intention to participate: Australia, China, Japan, Kazakhstan, Maldives, New Zealand, Papua New Guinea, Solomon Islands, South Korea and Vanuatu. SBS confirmed its participation, while China, Japan and South Korea were named as potential participants.

In May 2025, the Bhutan Broadcasting Service (BBS) confirmed its intention to participate in Eurovision Asia, stating that the inaugural contest would be held in Bangkok, Thailand, with 18 countries participating. On 24 June, the EBU published its Brand Impact Report for the Eurovision Song Contest, listing an adaptation in Asia-Pacific as under "ongoing development". In August, the location was instead stated by BBS as Mumbai, India, as it began organising a national selection titled Druk Dra that same month to select its entry. Additionally, Ho Chi Minh City Television (HTV), which serves Vietnam's Ho Chi Minh City area, had initially allocated a timeslot for a programme titled Eurovision Asia on 31 August. On 28 August, Martin Green, director of the Eurovision Song Contest, stated that "no plans have been confirmed or announced to date" for the contest in Asia-Pacific, further clarifying that Druk Dra was taken off air and deleted from online platforms at the request of the EBU's partners. In November, Marcus Tang was hired by Voxovation to serve as "Managing Director Asia". On 15 December, Christer Björkman, Head of Music and Founder at Voxovation, stated in the Eurovision Uncovered podcast that Eurovision Asia was ongoing "intensive preparations", with hopes of a public reveal "quite soon". In an interview, Green said that the national broadcasters in Asia-Pacific appreciated the contest as a way of giving a chance to national pop stars, portraying it as a "no-brainer". The name "Eurovision" was included in the title, despite the event consisting of Asian-Pacific participants, at the request of the prospective participating broadcasters.


2026 contest

On 29 March 2026, a website was launched, claiming that the contest would take place on 14 November in Bangkok, provisionally featuring nine countries: Bangladesh, Bhutan, Cambodia, Laos, Malaysia, Nepal, Philippines, Thailand, and Vietnam. The website was temporarily taken offline a few hours later. The contest was formally announced on 31 March under the name Eurovision Song Contest Asia, to be organised by the EBU and Voxovation with S2O Productions serving as partners, and Thailand's Channel 3 serving as the host broadcaster. The initial announcement listed ten countries (the aforementioned plus South Korea) alongside their respective participating broadcasters.


Format

On 31 March 2026, the EBU, Voxovation, and S2O Productions announced that the inaugural edition of the contest will be held on 14 November 2026 at IdeaLive in Bangkok, Thailand. Consisting of a single show, the results will be decided by a 50/50 split of professional jury voting and public voting. Each competing entry must be under three minutes and performed by no more than six people. All participating broadcasters are expected to organise national finals to select their entry. The winner will be invited to perform as a guest in the following edition of the Eurovision Song Contest in Bulgaria.


Provisional list of participants

As of May 2026, broadcasters from 10 countries have been provisionally confirmed to participate:


Other countries

Eligibility for participation in the contest covers both public service and privately-funded broadcasters in the Asian-Pacific region. The EBU has also confirmed that broadcasters taking part in the main Eurovision Song Contest will not be eligible to take part in the Asian-Pacific counterpart, meaning that those from countries in the Asian-Pacific region may not be able to take part whilst doing so in the main contest, such as SBS (Australia). These include EBU member broadcasters in countries geographically located in Asia, such as AMPTV (Armenia), İTV (Azerbaijan), CyBC (Cyprus), GPB (Georgia), IPBC (Israel), and TRT (Turkey), all of which have full rights to participate in the main contest.

Potential participating countries

Australia – On 31 March 2026, Australia was not listed among the initial countries competing in the contest. SBS later issued a statement confirming that it will not participate in the inaugural event but "will be watching with interest as it develops". SBS had previously worked with the EBU to develop an adaptation of the Eurovision Song Contest for the Asia-Pacific region. It has since been confirmed that SBS cannot take part as it participates in the original contest, however, it is still possible that another Australian broadcaster could still be invited to take part.

Kazakhstan – On 14 April 2026, it was reported that the Kazakh broadcaster, Khabar Agency, was invited to participate in Eurovision Asia. Subsequently, the Ministry of Culture and Information of Kazakhstan is in talks with Voxovation regarding the participation in the event of the state broadcaster Khabar Agency representing Kazakhstan, and that participation will depend on "financial considerations".


Broadcasts

Each participating broadcaster will broadcast the contest live nationally, and the European Broadcasting Union will stream the contest internationally on their Eurovision Song Contest YouTube channel.