Junior Eurovision Song Contest 2018




Location

The EBU confirmed on 15 October 2017 that the contest would be hosted by Belarus. This was the second time Belarus hosted the Junior Eurovision Song contest, after hosting the 2010 contest.


Venue

On 21 November 2017, Belarus' Deputy Prime Minister Vasily Zharko confirmed that the contest was scheduled to be held at Minsk-Arena in November 2018. The arena previously hosted the 2010 contest. However, on 26 November 2017, it was confirmed by the host broadcaster that the exact location of the contest is still unknown, stating that Minsk Arena was one of the possible options. On 18 March 2018, the 15,000-capacity Minsk-Arena was confirmed as the venue by the contest organisers.


Participants

On 25 July 2018, the EBU announced that 19 countries would participate in the 2018 contest. Kazakhstan and Wales made their debuts, while Azerbaijan, France and Israel returned to the contest, and Cyprus opted not to participate after doing so the previous two years. Despite originally confirming non-participation in the contest due to financial and structural difficulties, Ukraine was added to the list of participating countries on 2 August 2018, setting a record of 20 participating countries.


Format


Visual design

The slogan was the hashtag #LightUp. The logo of the contest was based around a morning star made of vertically inverted soundwaves. The source of inspiration was the artistic potential and creative aspiration of the young participants who fill the scene like a star.


Hosts

On 26 October 2018, it was announced that Eugene Perlin and Zinaida Kupriyanovich would be the main hosts of the contest, together with Helena Meraai in the green room. Meraai is the fourth person under the age of sixteen to ever host the Junior Eurovision Song Contest, after Ioana Ivan in 2006, Dmytro Borodin in 2009 and Lizi Japaridze in 2017, and is also the second former participant to host an edition of the contest. Meraai previously represented Belarus in the 2017 contest, where she placed fifth with the song "I Am the One". Perlin is one of the main country's television presenters and was the Eurovision commentator between 2013 and 2019, whilst Kupriyanovich is a singer and artist who has participated in Belarus' national selections for the 2015 and 2016 Junior Eurovision Song Contests and latter represented the country at the 2019 adult contest. It was also announced that Denis Dudinsky and Anna Kviloria would host the opening ceremony.


Voting

The results were determined by national juries and an online audience vote. Every country used a national jury that consisted of three music industry professionals and two kids aged between 10 and 15 who were citizens of the country they represent. The first phase of the online voting started on 23 November 2018 when a recap of all the rehearsal performances were shown on the official website before the viewers could vote. Following this recap, voters had the option to watch longer one-minute clips from each participant's rehearsal. This first round of voting ended on 25 November at 15:59 CET. The second phase of the online voting took place during the live show and started after the last performance and was open for 15 minutes. International viewers could vote for a minimum of three countries and a maximum of five, including their own country.

The number of points were determined by the percentage of votes received. The public vote counted for 50% of the final result, while the other 50% came from the professional juries.


Trophy

The trophy was designed by Kjell Engman of the Swedish glass company Kosta Boda, using the same design as was first introduced in the 2017 contest. The main trophy is a glass microphone with colored lines inside the upper part, which symbolize the flow of sound.


Postcards

Each postcard took place in a different location in Belarus. They all consisted of the upcoming participant putting on a virtual reality headset and, through it, experiencing a location in Belarus while doing various activities. At the conclusion of the postcard, the upcoming participant would take their headset off, and the performance would commence.

Albania – Chelyuskintsev Park, Minsk

France – Independence Palace, Minsk

Ireland – Belovezhskaya Pushcha National Park

Italy – Belarusian National Arts Museum, Minsk

Kazakhstan – Minsk railway station and the Belarusian countryside

Netherlands – National Library of Belarus, Minsk

Russia – National Opera and Ballet of Belarus, Minsk

Serbia – A farm and stable, the Belarusian countryside


Contest overview

The event took place on 25 November 2018 at 17:00 MSK (16:00 CET). Twenty countries participated, with the running order published on 19 November 2018. All the countries competing were eligible to vote with the jury vote, as well as participating and non-participating countries under an aggregated international online vote, eligible to vote. Poland won with 215 points, also winning the online vote. France came second with 203 points, with Australia (who won the jury vote), Ukraine, and Malta completing the top five. Azerbaijan, Albania, Portugal, Serbia, Wales occupied the bottom five positions.

The opening of the show featured the traditional flag parade. During the interval, Russian singer Polina Bogusevich performed a new version of her winning song "Wings". All participants then joined on stage for a rendition of the common song, "#LightUp".


Spokespersons

France – Daniil Rotenko and Lubava Marchuk


Detailed voting results


12 points

Below is a summary of all 12 points received from each country's professional juries.


Online voting

A total of 1,283,921 valid votes were received during the voting windows.


Other countries

For a country to be eligible for potential participation in the Junior Eurovision Song Contest, it needs to be an active member of the EBU. It is currently unknown whether the EBU issue invitations of participation to all 56 active members like they do for the Eurovision Song Contest.


Active EBU members

Bosnia and Herzegovina – On 25 May 2018, the Bosnian broadcaster Radio and Television of Bosnia and Herzegovina (BHRT) stated that they would not be allowed to debut at the contest in the near future until the debt-related sanctions placed on them by the EBU were lifted.

Denmark – On 16 February 2018, it was reported that the EBU was calling on Danish broadcaster Danish Broadcasting Corporation (DR) to return to the contest after an 11-year break. However, Jan Lagermand Lundme, the head of Entertainment at the Danish broadcaster, played down the likelihood of Denmark returning to the competition, saying "Now, never say never, but as long as the show is, as it is now, I’m definitely not going to compete again. The values that we put in Denmark in a program for children do not match the values of the Junior Eurovision Song Contest… It seems that the children are on stage and play adults instead of acting as children, and we think that is fundamentally wrong. Children must be children, they should not try to strive to be something they are not. It’s super bad for us, because we really wanted to be part of the show. Participating in a concept like Junior Eurovision would be a natural step for us after MGP, but it does not work when we do not feel the show fits the Danish values."

Lithuania – On 28 February 2018, the Lithuanian broadcaster Lithuanian National Radio and Television (LRT) declared that they would not return to contest in the near future. LRT executive producer Audrius Giržadas stated that "this contest has become a clone of the main Eurovision Song Contest and has nothing to do with childhood, little girls go on stage with clipped hairs, glued eyelashes and bare belly, copying Beyoncé and Christina Aguilera – this is not an event that we would like to participate in." Lithuania last took part in 2011.

United Kingdom – On 2 January 2018, the Belarusian broadcaster National State Television and Radio Company of the Republic of Belarus (BTRC) announced that a representative from an unknown British broadcaster would be attending the supervisory meeting for the 2018 contest. Two days later it was confirmed that the United Kingdom would not take part in the Steering Group meetings. During the year the contest was held, the United Kingdom last took part in 2005 before it would return in 2022. However, Wales, a country that is part of the United Kingdom, competed.


Broadcasts


Official album

Junior Eurovision Song Contest Minsk 2018 is a compilation album put together by the European Broadcasting Union, and was released by Universal Music Group on 16 November 2018. The album features all the songs from the 2018 contest.