Junior Eurovision Song Contest 2007




Location


Bidding phase and host selection

Three countries bid for the rights to host the fifth Junior Eurovision Song Contest: Hrvatska radiotelevizija (HRT) for Croatia; Cyprus Broadcasting Corporation (CyBC) for Cyprus; and Algemene Vereniging Radio Omroep (AVRO) for the Netherlands. AVRO were awarded the rights to host the contest in September 2006, with a budget of more than €2,000,000 being spent to stage the event.


Participants

Patricia Goldsmith, Communications Adviser of the Eurovision TV department, stated that nineteen countries would participate in the Junior Eurovision Song Contest 2007, though Spanish broadcaster Radiotelevisión Española (RTVE) later announced its withdrawal from the contest. Croatian broadcaster Hrvatska Radiotelevizija (HRT) also withdrew due to expense and difficulties in broadcasting the contest live.

Débutante countries included, Armenia, Bulgaria, Georgia and Lithuania. Originally Bosnia and Herzegovina as well was going to be one of the four débutants but Georgia took this place when Radiotelevizija Bosne i Hercegovine (BHRT) decided to withdraw from participation. The minimum age of contestants was raised from 8 to 10 years this year.

An official double CD of the Junior Eurovision Song Contest 2007 was intended to go on sale on 23 December 2007, however it was later cancelled due to a lack of interest.


Returning artists

Even though rules of Junior Eurovision do not allow participation of returning artists, Sweden's Frida Sandén previously provided backing vocals for Molly Sandén in 2006.


Format


Visual design

On 22 October 2007, the contest was officially presented to the media at a press conference where the first details regarding the show were confirmed. The theme for the contest was water and the motto was Make a big splash!. Five water curtains decorated the stage designed by Ronald van Bersselaar, which explained why this year’s logo featured the "singing girl" wearing boots.


Presenters

At the same press conference, Kim-Lian van der Meij was revealed to be the female host of the show, alongside Sipke Jan Bousema who was the previously announced as the male host.


Contest overview

The event took place on 8 December 2007 at 20:15 CET. Seventeen countries participated, with the running order published in October 2007. All the countries competing were eligible to vote with the televote. Belarus won with 137 points, with Armenia, Serbia, Georgia, and Macedonia, completing the top five. Lithuania, Cyprus, Belgium, Portugal, and Greece occupied the bottom five positions.

The show was opened by all participants alongside dancers from the Dance Academy Lucia Marthas performing the specially-commissioned UNICEF song "One World", written by Jeroen Rietbergen and Ronald Molendijk , on stage in the arena followed by the traditional flag parade introducing the 17 participating countries. The interval act included Dutch group Ch!pz and a performance by singer Katie Melua.


Spokespersons

Viewers from each participating country voted by telephone and SMS. Each country's awards points to their top-10 favourites based on these public voting results. The following spokespersons announced the point 1 to 8, 10, and the maximum 12 points.

Netherlands – Kimberly Nieuwenhuizen


Detailed voting results


12 points

Below is a summary of all 12 points received. All countries were given 12 points at the start of voting to ensure that no country finished with nul points.


Broadcasts

Most countries sent commentators to Rotterdam or commentated from their own country, in order to add insight to the participants and, if necessary, provide voting information. A live webcast was also streamed via the Junior Eurovision official website.